









     Contents
     Notes on Eating  7
Contemplations for Eating 95




NOTES ON EATING

Mindful Eating
To cultivate mindfulness, we can do the same
things we always do—walking, sitting, working,
eating, and so on—with mindful awareness
of what we are doing. When we’re eating, we
know that we are eating. When we open a
door, we know that we’re opening a door. Our
mind is with our actions.
   When you put a piece of fruit into your
mouth, all you need is a little bit of mindfulness
to be aware: “I am putting a piece of apple
in my mouth.” Your mind doesn’t need to be
somewhere else. If you’re thinking of work while
you chew, that’s not eating mindfully. When you
pay attention to the apple, that is mindfulness.
Then you can look more deeply and in just a
very short time you will see the apple seed, the
                       A8B


beautiful orchard and the sky, the farmer, the
picker, and so on. A lot of work is in that apple!
                        A9B


Nothing Comes
from Nothing
With just a little bit of mindfulness, you can
truly see where your bread comes from. It has
not come from nothing. Bread comes from
the wheat fields, from hard work, and from the
baker, the supplier, and the seller. But the bread
is more than that. The wheat field needs clouds
and sunshine. So in this slice of bread there is
sunshine, there is cloud, there is the labor of the
farmer, the joy of having flour, and the skill of
the baker and then—miraculously!—there is the
bread. The whole cosmos has come together
so that this piece of bread can be in your hand.
You don’t need to do a lot of hard work to get
this insight. You only need to stop letting your
mind carry you away with worrying, thinking,
and planning.
                           A10B


Your Body Belongs
to the Earth
In modern life, people tend to think their
bodies belong to them, that they can do any-
thing they want to themselves. But your body
is not only yours. Your body belongs to your
ancestors, your parents, and future genera-
tions. It also belongs to society and to all the
other living beings. The trees, the clouds, the
soil, and every living thing brought about the
presence of your body. We can eat with care,
knowing we are caretakers of our bodies,
rather than their owners.
                        A11B


Eating without Thinking
When we eat we usually think. We can enjoy
our eating a lot more if we practice not think-
ing when we eat. We can just be aware of the
food. Sometimes we eat and we’re not aware
that we’re eating. Our mind isn’t there. When
our mind isn’t present, we look but we don’t
see, we listen but we don’t hear, we eat but
we don’t know the flavor of the food. This is a
state of forgetfulness, the lack of mindfulness.
To be truly present we have to stop our think-
ing. This is the secret of success.
                        A12B


Waiting without Waiting
When we serve ourselves food and then bring
it to the table, we don’t need to feel we’re wait-
ing for other people to serve themselves and
be seated. All we have to do is breathe and
enjoy sitting. We haven’t eaten our meal yet,
but we can already feel joy and gratitude. It’s
an opportunity for us to be peaceful.
     Standing in line at a grocery store or a
restaurant, or waiting for the time to eat, we
don’t need to waste our time. We don’t need
to “wait” for one second. Instead, we can enjoy
breathing in and out for our nourishment and
healing. We can use that time to notice that we
will soon be able to have food, and we can be
happy and grateful during that time. Instead of
waiting, we can generate joy.
                         A13B


Slowing Down
When we can slow down and really enjoy our
food, our life takes on a much deeper quality.
I love to sit and eat quietly and enjoy each
bite, aware of the presence of my community,
aware of all the hard and loving work that has
gone into my food. When I eat in this way,
not only am I physically nourished, I am also
spiritually nourished. The way I eat influences
everything else that I do during the day.
    Eating is as important a time for medita-
tion as sitting or walking mediation time. It’s a
chance to receive the many gifts of the Earth
that I would not otherwise benefit from if my
mind were elsewhere. Here is a verse I like to
recite when I eat:
                        A14B


   In the dimension of space and time,
   We chew as rhythmically as we breathe.
   Maintaining the lives of all our ancestors,
   Opening an upward path for descendants.
We can use the time of eating to nourish the
best things our relatives have passed onto
us and to transmit what is most precious to
future generations.
                         A15B


Paying Attention
to Just Two Things
While we eat, we can try to pay attention to
just two things: the food that we’re eating
and our friends who are sitting around us and
eating with us. This is called mindfulness of
food and mindfulness of community. Eating
mindfully, we become aware of all the work
and energy that has gone into bringing the
food to us. If we are eating with others, we
can notice how wonderful it is that during
this sometimes hectic life we can find the
time to sit together in a relaxed way like
this to enjoy a meal. When you can breathe,
sit, and eat together with your family or
friends in mindfulness, this is called true
community-building.
                        A16B


Each Spoonful Contains
the Universe
Pay attention to each spoonful of food. As you
bring it up to your mouth, use your mindfulness
to be aware that this food is the gift of the
whole universe. The Earth and the sky have
collaborated to bring this spoonful of food to
you. While breathing in and out, you only need
a second or two to recognize this. We eat in
such a way that every morsel of food, every
moment of eating has mindfulness in it. It takes
only a few seconds to see that the food we’re
holding in our spoon is the gift of the whole
cosmos. While we chew, we maintain that
awareness. When we chew, we know that the
whole universe is there in that bite of food.
                       A17B


Breathing Comes First
The first thing to do when you sit down with
your bowl of food is to stop the thinking and
be aware of your breathing. Breathe in such a
way that you are nourished. You are nourished
by your breathing and you nourish other
people with your practice of breathing. We
nourish one another.


Turning off the TV
Sometimes people eat while watching tv. But
even if you turn off the tv, the tv in your mind
continues to run. So you have to also stop the
tv in your head. If there is thinking still going
on in your mind, you’ll be dispersed. To be
truly present you need to not just turn off the
television or radio in your house, you need
to turn off the conversation and images in
your head.
                        A19B


How Much Is Enough
We don’t need to eat a lot to feel nourished.
When we are fully there and alive for every
morsel of food, we eat in a way that each bite
fills us with peace and happiness. If we are full
of this joy, we may find that we naturally feel
satisfied with less food.
                       A20B


Preparing a Meal
When you prepare a meal with artful aware­
ness, it’s delicious and healthy. You have put
your mindfulness, love, and care into the meal,
then people will be eating your love. People
can fully enjoy the meal with body and mind,
just like you enjoy a beautiful work of art.
Eating is not only nourishing for the body, but
also for the mind.
                        A21B




The Kitchen
The kitchen can be a meditative practice
space if we practice mindful awareness while
we are cooking and cleaning there. We can set
an intention to execute our tasks in a relaxed
and serene way, following our breathing and
keeping our concentration on what we are
doing. If we are working with others, we may
only need to exchange a few words about the
work at hand.
                      A23B


A Kitchen Altar
In your own kitchen, you might want to create
a kitchen altar to remind yourself to practice
mindfulness while cooking. It can be just a
small shelf with enough room for an incense
holder and perhaps a small flower vase, a
beautiful stone, a small picture of an ancestor
or spiritual teacher, or a statue—whatever is
most meaningful to you. When you come into
the kitchen, you can begin your work by offer-
ing incense and practicing mindful breathing,
making the kitchen into a meditation hall.
                        A24B


Cooking without Rushing
While cooking, allow enough time so you don’t
feel rushed. If we are aware that our bodies
and those of our loved ones depend on the
food we’re preparing, this awareness will guide
us to cook healthy food infused with our love
and mindful attention.


Practicing Peace while
Chopping Vegetables
Peace can be practiced while chopping
vegetables, cooking, washing dishes, watering
the vegetable garden, and also while driving
or working. Practice releasing the tension in
body and mind and being completely with your
task. The time when you work in the kitchen is
also the time for meditation.
                      A26B


Setting the Table
Eating a meal in mindfulness is an important
practice. We turn off the tv, put down our
newspaper, and work together for five or
ten minutes, setting the table and finishing
whatever needs to be done. During these few
minutes, we can be very happy. When the
food is on the table and eveyone is seated,
we practice breathing. “Breathing in, I calm my
body. Breathing out, I smile,” we repeat three
times. We can recover ourselves completely
after three breaths like this.
                       A27B


Cooking with Joy
Cooking can bring us a lot of joy. When I
put the water into the basin for washing the
vegetables, I look deeply at the water to
see its wonderful nature. I see that the water
comes from high in the mountains or from
deep within the Earth right into our kitchen.
I know that there are places where people
have to walk several miles just to carry back
a pail of water on their shoulders. Here, water
is available whenever I turn on the tap. Aware
of the preciousness of clean water, I value the
water that is available to me. I also value the
electricity that I use to turn on a light or to boil
water. I only need to be aware that there is
water and electricity easily accessible to me,
and I can be happy straightaway. When I am
peeling vegetables or cooking them, I can do
                         A28B


it in mindfulness and with love. I see cooking
as a way to offer nourishment and care to my
family and friends. I will easily find joy and
peace in the work. Looking deeply at a tomato,
a bunch of grapes, or a piece of tofu, I can see
the wonderful nature of these things, how they
were nurtured by the soil, the sun, the rain,
and the seed. Try to organize your life so that
you have enough time and energy to cook in a
leisurely and peaceful way. The energy of love
and harmony in the kitchen will penetrate into
the food that you’re cooking to offer to your
loved ones and yourself.
                       A29B


A grain of rice Contains
the universe
When we look at a grain of rice, one second
of mindfulness and concentration allows us to
see that this grain contains the whole world—
the rain, the cloud, the Earth, time, space,
farmers, everything. Mindfulness and con-
centration bring insight, and suddenly we can
see so much in a grain of rice. It’s very quick!
Wherever there is mindfulness and concentra-
tion, there is insight. When you put that grain
of rice into your mouth, you are putting the
whole universe in your mouth. This is possible
when you stop your thinking. When you chew
that grain of rice, just chew, so no thinking will
cut you off from this wonderful reality.
                         A30B


Communion
In some traditions, monastics want to take their
minds off food and focus on the virtues of a
spiritual life. In my tradition, we do the oppo-
site. We just focus on the food. We see the
food as the cosmos. In the Catholic tradition,
in the Eucharist you see the piece of bread as
the body of Jesus. In the Buddhist tradition,
we see the piece of bread as the body of the
cosmos. Everything is there. When you chew
it mindfully, without thinking, you can see very
well all that the piece of bread contains. That
is why when you take a bite of the bread and
chew mindfully, you are truly in communion
with all of life.
                          A31B


Take Your Time
It’s good to take time to eat, because the time
for a meal can be a very happy time. Take time
to enjoy your breakfast, lunch, and dinner.
Enjoy your meal. Stop the thinking and be
there fully, body and mind.
                       A32B




an Ambassador
of the cosmos
When you pick up an ear of corn, take one
second to look at it. You can see the Earth, the
sunshine, and the rain in the corn. Everything
has come together to produce that corn you
are holding. So the corn is an ambassador
coming to nourish you. It only takes one or two
seconds to get that insight. When you put the
corn into your mouth, chew it mindfully and
greet the universe.
                       A34B


Chew Your Food,
Not Your Worries
Sometimes we eat, but we aren’t thinking of
our food. We’re thinking of the past or the
future or mulling over some worry or anxiety
again and again. So stop thinking about your
business, about the office, or about anything
that isn’t happening right now. Don’t chew your
worries, your fear, or your anger. If you chew
your planning and your anxiety, it’s difficult to
feel grateful for each piece of food. Just chew
your food.
                        A35B


Nourished by the Practice
Try to be present with your food and with the
people sitting around the table with you. Don’t
close your eyes or look down while you chew.
You can open your eyes and if you are with
people, notice them alive and well. When we
chew with awareness, we’re not just nourished
by the food, we’re nourished by our practice of
mindfulness, peace, and happiness. While we
chew, we breathe and we enjoy our breathing
and our ability to eat and receive nourishment
from our food.
                        A36B


Food as Medicine
In the original Five Contemplations as they
were recited during the Buddha’s time, food
was considered to be medicine. But I think that
when the Buddha received good food, he also
enjoyed it. I don’t think he thought of it as just
taking medicine. We know the food nourishes
our bodies. But we can also appreciate and
savor our food.
                        A37B


Healing
When we eat mindfully, we consume exactly
what we need in order to keep our bodies, our
minds, and the Earth healthy. When we prac-
tice like this, we reduce suffering for ourselves
and for others. We begin to heal ourselves
and can help heal the world. As a spiritual
family and as the human family, we can all help
make our lives more sustainable by following
this practice.
                        A38B


Turning off the Radio
In order to eat with joy, we have to turn off
“Radio NST”: Non-Stop Thinking. Even if our
bodies are sitting still while we eat, usually
our minds are racing. In order to truly be pres-
ent for our meal, we have to stop the constant
internal dialogue. To eat without thinking is
to eat in freedom. We are free because we’re
not thinking about the past, the future, and our
projects. We are free to be sitting, whether
alone or with loved ones, and enjoying
our meal.
                         A39B


Our Ancestors
Are in the Soil
That nut, fruit, vegetable, or grain that you eat
has pulled up nutrition from the soil in order
to grow. In the soil are many people who
have died, have been transformed, and have
become part of the soil. Maybe in this mouthful
of rice are also the bones of many hundreds
of generations as well as many dead leaves,
worms, and animals’ bones. Maybe in a previ-
ous life you had been there and died there,
and your own bones have disintegrated in that
land. During the time of eating, your practice
is to look deeply into that grain of rice and
enjoy all that has gone into its creation. There
are so many things to enjoy and to discover in
each bite.
                        A40B




Eating Mindfully
Is a Practice
When we eat our meal, we should show up
for that meal 100 percent. Eating mindfully is a
practice. If we choose to drink a cup of tea in
mindfulness, the pleasure of drinking tea will
more than double because we are truly there
and the tea is also truly there. Life is real; it’s
not a dream when mindfulness is there.
                       A42B


Eating in Silence
Sometimes, it can be helpful to have a silent
meal to help us practice mindful eating. That
way, we can focus our attention on our breath,
the food, and the company around us in order
to become fully present in the here and now.
                      A43B




Eating a String Bean
Hold up a string bean and take a moment
to see that it is a string bean with the whole
world in it. There are clouds, sunshine,
the whole Earth, and the hard work of the
gardener. When we can see like that, we
have wisdom. When we have wisdom, it
means that we have mindfulness and con-
centration. Don’t chew your worries, your
suffering, or your projects. That’s not good
for your heath. Just chew the string bean.
                         A45B


Nourished by the
present moment
In our daily activities, we often rush from one
thing to another. In between tasks we spend
our time planning how we’ll accomplish future
tasks. In all that hurrying and strategizing, we
become isolated from the present moment.
Eating is a chance to return to the present mo-
ment and stop the rushing and the planning.
                         A46B


How the Buddha Ate
Eating meditation is a practice that dates back
very far. During his lifetime, the Buddha ate
with his community of monks and nuns. Each
day they ate together in silence, nourished by
the food and by the presence of their brothers
and sisters in the practice. I don’t think they
were worrying about their schedule or about
the past or the future. I think they just enjoyed
being together and eating well. We can eat
like that too.
                         A47B


The Value of a Meal
We should reflect deeply on what we buy and
what we eat. What we buy and eat can con-
tribute to climate change or it can help stop it.
Eating is a chance to nourish our bodies and
know that we are not destroying the Earth by
doing so.
    The value of a meal is not just determined
by the amount of money we’ve spent on the
ingredients or on a meal at a restaurant. There
is so much hard work that goes into growing,
harvesting, distributing, and cooking even a
dish of rice. A good meal doesn’t have to mean
it contains expensive ingredients. The best
food is often very simple. There are things the
grocery store can’t provide us with. No matter
how much money you have, you can’t buy it.
                       A48B


It’s only with mindfulness, concentration, and
insight that you can get a truly rich meal.




Sitting While You Eat
Sometimes we are rushing so much in our day
that we eat only as we’re running from one
place to another. We eat in our car or as we
walk. Please sit when you eat. When you sit,
that is a reminder to stop. You have nothing to
do, nowhere to go.
                        A51B


One Mindful Breath
It takes only one moment to take a mind-
ful in-breath and out-breath before you eat.
Bring the mind back to the body. Your body is
always available for you. You can bring your
attention out of your head and into your body.
Before you focus on the food, focus on being
present with your body: “Breathing in, I am
aware that my body is still there. Breathing out,
I smile to my body.” This body has been given
to us by our parents and those before them.
When this body was just born, it was very light.
As we grow, we tend to get weighed down by
worries and lose our freshness and beauty.
Mindful eating helps us regain this freshness,
nourishing our spirits as well as our bodies.
Eating with appreciation of our own bodies, we
eat with more relaxation and joy.
                       A52B


The Right Amount
When we take a moment to sit and breathe
before we eat, we can get in touch with the
real hunger in our body. We can discover if
we’re eating because we’re hungry or if we’re
eating because it’s the time to eat and the
food is there. If we’re paying attention and
taking our time, we also know how much to
eat. Mindfulness is recognizing what is there in
the present moment. What is there is the fact
that you are still alive and your health is still
there. The food in front of you is available to
help nourish your body and keep you healthy.
                         A53B


A Silent Meal
Happiness is possible during the meal, and
silence helps enormously. You may want to
pick one meal a week to eat in silence. A silent
meal helps you come back to yourself and
arrive in the present moment. A truly silent
meal includes turning off the noise in your
head as well as finding a quiet place to enjoy
your meal. You may like to choose to eat the
same meal every week silently. This can be a
meal you eat by yourself or, if you have family
or friends who want to join you for this meal,
that is wonderful. Silence helps you return
to your mindful breathing. You can stop the
internal mental chatter, relax, breathe, and
smile. Such a meal can provide many moments
of happiness.
                       A54B


A Meal at Google
When I visited Google, I shared a silent meal
with some of the people who work there.
Afterward, they wrote me and said, “Never
before in that cafeteria have I had a meal that
wonderful. I was so happy. I felt so peaceful.
Nobody said anything in that whole room
full of people. Everybody was quiet from the
beginning to the end of the meal. In the history
of Google, that’s the first such meal we’ve
ever had.”
                       A55B


Arranging a Meal
You can arrange your schedule so you have
enough time to eat. The place and the food
should be appropriate. What we eat is very
important. Tell me what you eat and I will tell
you who you are. Tell me where you eat, and I
will tell you who you are.
    We are what we consume. If we look
deeply into what and how much we consume
every day, we’ll come to know our own nature
very well. We have to eat, drink, and consume,
but if we do it unmindfully, we may destroy
our body and our consciousness. A meal is
an opportunity to show gratitude to those that
came before us and those that will come after
we are gone.
                       A56B


Eating Is an Art
Eating well is an art. It doesn’t require fancy
cooking, but it does require practice and
concentration. Your body is not just yours. It is
a gift and a responsibility. To keep it healthy,
we need to know how to eat.


choosing what to eat
Our way of eating and producing food can
be very violent, to other species, to our
own bodies, and to the Earth. Or our way of
growing, distributing, and eating food can
be part of creating a larger healing. We get
to choose.
   The planet suffers deeply because of the
way many of us eat now. Forests are razed to
grow grain to feed livestock, and the way the
animals are raised pollutes our water and air.
A lot of grain and water is also used to make
alcohol. Tens of thousands of children die of
starvation and malnutrition every day, even
though our Earth has the ability to feed us all.
                       A58B


    With each meal, we make choices that help
or harm the planet. “What shall I eat today?”
is a very deep question. You might want to
ask yourself that question every morning. You
may find that as you practice mindful eating
and begin to look deeply at what you eat
and drink, your desire for certain foods may
change. Your happiness and that of the Earth
are intertwined.
                      A59B


a vegetarian diet
The Food and Agricultural Organization (FAO)
of the United Nations proposed that the meat
industry be reduced by at least 50 percent
in order to save our planet. The simple act of
becoming vegetarian can make a difference in
the health of our planet.
    If you’re not able to entirely stop eating
meat, you can still decide to make an
effort to cut back. By cutting meat out of
your diet even five or ten days a month,
you’re already helping. Try to reduce your
consumption by at least 50 percent. This
begins to nourish your compassion. If you
know that you’re living in a way that makes a
future possible for your planet, you’ll have joy.
                         A60B


The Planet Is Us
Our food comes from this beautiful planet. The
Earth is inside of us, in each morsel of food, in
the air we breathe, in the water that we drink
and that flows through us. Enjoy being part of
the Earth and eat in such a way that allows you
to be aware that each bite is deepening your
connection to the planet.
                         A61B


Bon Appétit!
Before eating, we wish people will have a
good appetite. We say “bon appétit,” just as
before going to sleep we say “good night.” In
Vietnamese, they say “please have a sweet,
delicious sleep.” In Vietnamese, the word
“delicious” always goes together with the word
“healthy.” So delicious food must be healthy
food. We eat delicious food in order to have
strength and good health. Food that is tasty
but destroys our bodies and our minds is
not healthy.
    When you eat with mindfulness, you
consume deliciously. If you don’t feel happy,
if you don’t feel good enough, then you have
to inquire of those who’ve practiced a long
time, “Can you help me? How can I taste the
moment deliciously?”
                       A62B


Attention to What We Eat
Before eating, you may see a condiment dish
with red chili peppers. It looks very appealing.
But when you look deeper, you know you are
sensitive to them, and if you eat them they
may affect your digestion. So although they’re
delicious, they may not be healthy for you.
Something can be delicious and not healthy,
so we have to be very careful about what we
prepare and what we eat. Healthy is good, but
healthy and not delicious isn’t good either. You
have to have both.
                      A63B


Bound by a Hundred Strings
Eating is a practice. The practice must be
nourishing for us, for our bodies, and also for
our minds. If you eat but you are bound by a
hundred strings of worries, anger, irritation,
stress, and projects, then these one hundred
strings are pulling you in one hundred dir­
ections. Your food and your experience of
eating will be empty and worthless. So you
have to plan properly and have the intention
that whenever you eat, you eat in freedom.
                       A64B


Meditation as Food
Meditation practice is also a kind of food
because it nourishes us. Consider the practice
offered by the Buddha to be a kind of food.
Any practice must be a kind of food. Walking
is like a delicious food. Eating is a delicious
food, sitting is a delicious food, and working
meditation is also delicious food.
                         A65B


What a Baby Eats
Often when I am giving a talk, a few babies will
be in the audience, and some of them will be
nursing. The infants don’t know what a bell is;
they don’t understand the word “mindfulness,”
but they are nourished both by their mother’s
bodies as well as by the sounds of the bell and
the talk. They can feel the collective energy
of deep peace as everyone breathes in and
out. They are getting many different kinds of
nourishing food—the milk from their mothers,
the sounds of the bell, and the collective
energy of mindfulness all around them.
                      A66B


Organizing a Meal
We can organize a meal in such a way that it
can really be a time of practice. A meal can
nourish and heal, be delicious, and also help
create a peaceful atmosphere. We have many
people who are very good at organizing. They
get a lot done during the day. But sometimes
they forget to eat! They don’t organize their
day to include mindful meals. Organizing a
meal requires making the time to eat, without
distractions and worries. Eat in a way that is
relaxing and brings you joy. It doesn’t take too
much organizing and the results are profound.
                       A67B




Eating and Smiling
Sitting at the table and eating with other
people is a chance to offer an authentic smile
of friendship and understanding. It’s very easy,
but not many people do it. To me, the most
important part of the practice is to look at each
person and smile. When family or community
members sit together and cannot smile at each
other, the situation is a very dangerous one.
Upon finishing your meal, take a few moments
to notice that you have finished, that your bowl
is now empty, and your hunger is satisfied.
This is another opportunity to smile and be
grateful that you have had this nourishing food
to eat, supporting you on the path of love
and understanding.
                        A69B


Eating with Children
in Silence
Sometimes parents who might want to enjoy a
silent meal think that their children will not be
able to enjoy or participate in the silence. But
children are very capable of eating in silence
for five, ten, or even twenty minutes and can
enjoy it very much.
                        A70B


Cultivating Compassion
Having the opportunity to sit with our family
and friends and enjoy wonderful food is
something precious, something not everyone
has. Many people in the world are hungry.
When I hold a bowl of warm, nutritous food, I
know that I’m fortunate, and I feel compassion
for all those who don’t have enough to eat
and who are without friends or family. Right
at the dinner table, we can cultivate the
seeds of compassion that will strengthen
our determination to help hungry and lonely
people be nourished.
                       A71B


Mindful Conversation
at Mealtime
I don’t recommend that all meals be silent. I
think talking to each other is a wonderful way
to be in touch. But we have to distinguish
between different kinds of talk. Some subjects
can separate us, for instance, if we talk about
other people’s shortcomings. The food that
has been prepared carefully will have no
value if we let this kind of talk dominate our
meal. Instead we can speak about things that
nourish our awareness of the food and our
being together, cultivating happiness.
   Refrain from discussing subjects that can
destroy your awareness of the people around
you and the food. If someone is thinking about
something other than the good food on the
                        A72B


table, such as his difficulties in the office or
with friends, it means he is losing the present
moment and the food. You can help by
returning his attention to the meal.
                        A73B


Inviting the Bell
at Mealtime
In our practice centers, we invite the bell
three times before eating, and then we eat
in silence for about twenty minutes. Eating
in silence, we are fully aware of our food’s
nourishment for body and mind. In order to
deepen our practice of mindful eating and
support the peaceful atmosphere, we remain
seated during this silent period. At the end of
this time, two sounds of the bell will be invited.
We may then start a mindful conversation with
our friends or begin getting up from the table.
                        A74B


The Purpose of Breakfast
A few years ago, I asked some children, “What
is the purpose of eating breakfast?” One boy
replied, “To get energy for the day.” Another
said, “The purpose of eating breakfast is to
eat breakfast.” I think the second child is more
correct. The purpose of eating is to eat.




A Full Life
If we feel empty, we don’t need to go to the
refrigerator to take things out to eat. When you
eat like that it’s because there is a feeling of
emptiness, loneliness, or depression inside.
The moments of our daily lives can be filled
with joy and meaningful activities. Our com-
munity includes our family and friends and our
connection to other living beings. They are
there to help us get out of these feelings. We
are not alone. Sharing a meal together is not
just to sustain our bodies and celebrate life’s
wonders, but also to experience freedom, joy,
and the happiness of being in a harmonious
community during the whole time of eating.
                        A77B


Getting Support
Suppose you have trouble with eating. You eat
more than you need to and that has brought
you a lot of difficulties and suffering. One way
to return to joyful eating is to make a com-
mitment to eat with others who support you.
Taking refuge in your community can help
a lot. We all need a community to help us in
our practice. Even if you live alone and don’t
have a community to practice with, you are
not really alone. Many hands have gone into
making the food you’re eating. There are the
microbes and bacteria and other microscopic
living things that are in your food, in you, and
all around you. Your ancestors as well as your
descendants are with you in every cell of
your being.
                         A78B


Truly Seeing
When we look at the people we’re eating with,
we can see them fully in just a few moments.
We don’t need two hours to be able to see
another person. If we are really settled within
ourselves, we only need to look for a few
seconds, and that is enough to see our friend.
I think that if a family has five members, only
about five or ten seconds is needed to prac-
tice this “looking and seeing.”
                          A79B


Enjoying dishwashing
As novices, we had to wash dishes for one
hundred monks. There was no running water—
no cold water, no hot water, no tap water at
all, and no soap. You may wonder how we
managed to wash the dishes! We had only
ashes, rice husks, and a coconut skin to use as
a sponge. Many people in my country still use
this. You take a layer of coconut skin and dry
it to make into implements for cleaning pots
and pans. We had to heat up a big pot of water
before we could do any scrubbing. As a novice,
I had to go out and gather wood in the pine-
covered hills. We gathered dead branches and
pine needles into a big heap. You can cook
rice or soup with just pine needles.
                        A80B


    We were just two novices washing the
dishes for one hundred monks. It was a lot
of fun washing dishes together, even without
hot running water and soap. Some countries
have modern homes that are very comfortable.
The water, hot and cold, comes right into the
kitchen; you have only to turn on the tap.
    You can stand there and enjoy washing
dishes. But maybe you are lazy. You see a big
pile of dishes and you don’t want to go over
and wash them. But as soon as you roll up
your sleeves and stand in front of the basin, it
is not difficult anymore.
    Whether you are living in a modern country,
or you have only a well for water, you can still
enjoy washing the dishes.
                        A81B




Dishwashing as Meditation
Suppose the baby Buddha—or the baby
Mohammed, the baby Moses, or the baby
Jesus—had just been born. You would want
to bathe him with clean water. Wash every
bowl, every dish as if you are bathing a baby—
breathing in, feeling joy; breathing out, smiling.
   Every minute can be a holy, sacred minute.
Where do you seek the spiritual? You seek
the spiritual in every ordinary thing that you do
every day. Sweeping the floor, watering the
vegetables, and washing the dishes become
holy and sacred if mindfulness is there. With
mindfulness and concentration, everything
becomes spiritual.
                        A83B


DRINKING A CLOUD
Something as simple and ordinary as drinking
a cup of tea can bring us great joy and help us
feel our connection to the Earth. The way we
drink our tea can transform our lives if we truly
devote our attention to it.
   Sometimes we hurry through our daily
tasks, looking forward to the time when we
can stop and have a cup of tea. But then when
we’re finally sitting with the cup in our hands,
our mind is still running off into the future and
we can’t enjoy what we’re doing; we lose the
pleasure of drinking our tea. We need to keep
our awareness alive and value each moment
of our daily life. We may think our other tasks
are less pleasant than drinking tea. But if we
do them with awareness, we may find that
they’re actually very enjoyable.
                         A84B


   Drinking a cup of tea is a pleasure we can
give ourselves every day. To enjoy our tea, we
have to be fully present and know clearly and
deeply that we are drinking tea.
   When you lift your cup, you may like to
breathe in the aroma. Looking deeply into
your tea, you see that you are drinking fragrant
plants that are the gift of Mother Earth. You
see the labor of the tea pickers; you see the
luscious tea fields and plantations in Sri Lanka,
China, and Vietnam. You know that you are
drinking a cloud; you are drinking the rain. The
tea contains the whole universe.
                        A85B


Snack Meditation
A young friend once asked me to teach him
about the practice of mindfulness. I offered
him a tangerine, but he continued telling me
about his many projects—his work for peace,
social justice, and so on. While he was eating,
he was thinking and talking. He peeled the
tangerine and tossed the sections into his
mouth and quickly chewed and swallowed.
    I said, “Jim, stop! Eat your tangerine.” He
looked at me and understood. So he stopped
talking and began to eat much more slowly
and mindfully. He separated each of the
remaining sections, smelled their beautiful
fragrance, put one section at a time into his
mouth, and felt all the juices surrounding
his tongue. What is the purpose of eating a
                         A86B


tangerine? It is to eat the tangerine. During the
time you eat a tangerine, eating that tangerine
is the most important thing in your life.
    The next time you have a tangerine, please
put it in the palm of your hand and look at it in
a way that makes the tangerine real. You don’t
need a lot of time; just two or three seconds is
enough. Looking at it, you will see the beauti-
ful tangerine blossom with sunshine and rain,
and the tiny tangerine fruit forming. You can
see the baby fruit grow and its color change
from green to orange. Peeling the tangerine,
smelling and tasting it, you can be very happy.
Everything we do can be like this. Whether
planting lettuce, washing dishes, writing a
poem, or adding columns of numbers, we can
do it with concentration and awareness.
                         A87B


the right amount
Mindfulness of eating helps us to know what
and how much we should eat. We should take
only what we can eat. We tend to ignore the
rule of moderation. Many of us should take
less than what we’re used to eating every day.
We see that people who consume less are
healthier and more joyful, and that those who
consume a lot may suffer very deeply. If we
chew carefully, if we eat only what is healthy,
then we won’t bring sickness into our body or
our mind.
                       A88B


Snacking
If we are hungry, a little snack can be very
satisfying. But often we develop a habit of
eating a snack whenever we feel loneliness
or anxiety. A mindful breath is a good way for
your body to “snack” on some mindfulness
and recognize and embrace strong feelings
that may be there. After a mindful breath, you
may have less desire to go and fill up with a
snack to distract yourself. Your body is nour-
ished by your breath.
                         A89B


Eating our Feelings
We human beings have many feelings, both
positive and negative. Some people tend to
eat more when they’re joyful, while others tend
to eat less. Some people eat when they are
sad or upset as a way of eating their feelings,
hoping the feelings will go away. Food
becomes a craving then, rather than a source
of nourishment. If we don’t attempt to look
deeply to understand our craving, it will grow.
When we take the time to take care of our
emotions with mindfulness and compassion,
then we can just eat. We can enjoy our food
without craving and develop a healthy and
positive relationship to eating.
                       A90B


Nourishing Ourselves
with Mindfulness
We all know that sometimes we open the
refrigerator and take out an item that is not
good for our health. We are intelligent enough
to recognize that. But still we go ahead and
eat it to try to cover up the uneasiness within
ourselves—we consume to forget our worries
and our anxieties and to repress negative
energies like fear and anger. Instead of con-
suming when a feeling of anxiety comes up,
invite the energy of mindfulness to manifest.
Practice mindful walking and mindful breathing
to generate the energy of mindfulness, and
invite that energy up to take care of the energy
that’s making you suffer. If we can practice like
this, we’ll have enough of the energy of mind-
fulness to take care of our fear, our anger, and
other negative energies.
                        A91B


Mindful Consumption
Is for Everyone
Eating mindfully is a practice that supports
ourselves, our families, our society, and the
planet, and it is something everyone of any
age can do. Leaders of organizations and
communities can model responsible and
compassionate eating. If you are a mayor, a
governor, or a president, you may want to
encourage the people you govern to engage
in mindful consumption so that you can reduce
the violence and suffering in your community.
                       A92B


The Joy of Eating
Eating should be very joyful. When I pick up
my food with my chopsticks, with my spoon
or fork, or with my hands, I take time to look
at it for a moment before I put it in my mouth.
If I am really present, I will recognize the food
right away, whether it is an apple, a radish, or a
piece of potato. I smile to it, put it in my mouth,
and chew with complete awareness of what I
am eating. I chew my food in such a way that
life, joy, solidity, and nonfear become possible.
After eating, I feel nourished, not only
physically, but also mentally and spiritually.
                          A93B




Contemplations
  for Eating
      A95B


Contemplating our meal
Contemplating our food for a few moments
before eating can bring us much happiness.
We look at the food in a way that the food
becomes real. We think about all the people,
animals, plants, and minerals and all the condi-
tions that brought the food to our plate. The
food reveals our connection with the Earth
and all beings. We remember our determina-
tion to eat in a way that preserves our health
and well-being and the health and well-being
of the Earth. The following contemplations
and verses can help us practice mindfulness
while eating.
                       A96B


Practicing with The Five
Contemplations
The Five Contemplations can be said before
a meal to remind us to be fully present for our
meal and enjoy it. You can print them out and
read them aloud, or you can memorize them.
Then they become truly a part of your meal.
   But the Five Contemplations aren’t just for
reading or reciting before the meal. Otherwise,
they can become like something we simply
check off before we eat, but then we continue
to eat as we always have, carried away by
our thinking. Throughout the meal, try to live
the Five Contemplations. When you practice
eating mindfully, you are worthy of the food.
The food that has come to your plate is the
result of a lot of love and hard work.
                         A97B


The Five Contemplations
1. This food is a gift of the Earth, the sky,
   numerous living beings, and much hard and
   loving work.
2. M ay we eat with mindfulness and gratitude
    so as to be worthy to receive this food.
3. M ay we recognize and transform unwhole-
    some mental formations, especially our
    greed, and learn to eat with moderation.
                          A98B


4. M
    ay we keep our compassion alive by eat-
   ing in such a way that reduces the suffering
   of living beings, stops contributing to climate
   change, and heals and preserves our pre-
   cious planet.
5. We accept this food so that we may nurture
   our brotherhood and sisterhood, build our
   community, and nourish our ideal of serving
   all living beings.
                        A99B


A Gift of the Earth
THE FIRST CONTEMPLATION: This food is a gift
of the Earth, the sky, numerous living beings,
and much hard and loving work.
The first contemplation makes us aware that
our food comes directly from the Earth and
sky. It is a gift of the Earth and sky, and also
of the people who prepared it. There is a lot
of loving work that goes into making a meal.
This contemplation puts you in touch with the
insight that the one contains the all. When you
pick up a carrot, you can see right away that
the Earth, the sky, and the whole universe
have come together to make that wonderful
carrot. Many people have done a lot of loving
work and many elements have come together
                          A100B


to bring that carrot to your plate. When you put
it in your mouth, you can be in touch with the
whole universe. A bunch of beets, a head of
lettuce, and a loaf of bread all help you to be in
touch with the love, hard work, and difficulties
that brought the food to you. Even if you are
eating by yourself, you are not alone. You are
part of a larger community that helped grow
the food. In your food you can see the pre-
cious presence and work of so many people.
                        A101B


Gratitude
THE SECOND CONTEMPLATION: May we eat
with mindfulness and gratitude so as to be
worthy to receive this food.
The second contemplation is about being
aware of our food’s presence and being
thankful for having it. We can’t allow ourselves
to get lost in the past or the future. We are
there for the food and our food is there for us;
it is only fair. Eat in mindfulness and you will be
worthy of the Earth and the sky.
     When we look deeply at the work that goes
into growing and preparing our food, gratitude
comes naturally. So many hands have been
part of bringing our food to the table. Eating
mindfully is a way of showing appreciation
for all the hard work that has gone into
manifesting this meal.
                          A102B


Eating with Moderation
THE THIRD CONTEMPLATION: May we recog­
nize and transform unwholesome mental
form­ations, especially our greed, and learn to
eat with moderation.
The third contemplation is about becoming
aware of our negative tendencies and not
allowing them to carry us away. We need to
learn how to eat in moderation, to eat the
right amount of food. It is very important not to
overeat. If you eat slowly and chew very care-
fully, you will get plenty of nutrition. The right
amount of food is the amount that helps us
stay healthy.
    The Buddha was always reminding his
monks to eat with moderation. To eat with
moderation means to have a light, healthy
                        A103B


body. Many illnesses come to us through
our mouths. So we want to look into what
we eat, and know what we should eat and
what we should not eat. Look with the eye of
the Buddha. The quality of the food and the
quantity of the food is very important. Every
monk and nun traditionally has an alms bowl,
which is called “the vessel of appropriate
measure.” It helps them know how much food
to take. When they’re offered too much food
during the almsround, they give some of it
to others. So the bowl helps a lot. We know
exactly what quantity of food we want to
consume, as well as the quality.
                       A104B


Eating to Reduce Suffering
THE FOURTH CONTEMPLATION: May we
keep our compassion alive by eating in such
a way that reduces the suffering of living
beings, stops contributing to climate change,
and heals and preserves our precious planet.
The fourth contemplation is about the quality
of our food. We are determined to ingest only
food that has no toxins for our body and our
consciousness, food that keeps us healthy
and nourishes our compassion. When you eat
in such a way that you can keep compassion
alive in you, that is mindful eating.
    Sometimes, even if we’re not hungry, we
eat to cover up the suffering inside. We can
eat in a way that doesn’t cover up suffering
but acknowledges it and helps it transform.
                        A105B


You may even smile to your own suffering,
because suffering has a role to play in helping
us transform. Awareness of suffering plays a
very important role in helping us to understand
suffering and generate the energy of compas-
sion. With mindfulness we’re no longer afraid
of suffering and pain. We learn how to make
good use of the mud of suffering to fabricate
lotus flowers.
                      A106B


Nurturing All Beings
THE FIFTH CONTEMPLATION: We accept this
food so that we may nurture our brotherhood
and sisterhood, build our community, and
nourish our ideal of serving all living beings.
The fifth contemplation reminds us to be
aware that we receive food in order to realize
something. Our lives should have meaning,
and that meaning is to help people suffer less
and help them to touch the joys of life. When
we have compassion in our hearts and we
know that we are able to help a person suffer
less, life begins to have more meaning. This
is an important source of nourishment for us
and can bring us a lot of joy. One individual is
capable of helping many living beings. This is
something we can do wherever we are.
                       A107B


Six Food Contemplations
for Young People
It’s wonderful for families to experience the
happiness of sitting and eating mindfully
together. These Six Contemplations were
written particularly to be shared with young
people before a meal, but they can be enjoyed
by anybody.
1. This food is the gift of the whole universe:
   the Earth, the sky, the rain, and the sun.
2. W e thank the people who have made this
    food, especially the farmers, the people at
    the market, and the cooks.
                          A108B


3. W  e only put on our plate as much food as
     we can eat.
4. W
    e want to chew the food slowly so that we
   can enjoy it.
5. This food gives us energy to practice being
   more loving and understanding.
6. W e eat this food in order to be healthy and
    happy, and to love each other as a family.
                        A109B


Serving Food
   In this food
   I see clearly
   the presence of the entire universe
   supporting my existence.
This verse helps us see that our life and the
lives of all species are interrelated. Eating is a
very deep practice. As you wait to serve your-
self or be served, look at the food and smile
to it. It contains sunshine, clouds, the sky, the
Earth, the farmer, everything.
    Look at a peach deeply. Don’t put it into
your mouth right away. Look at it and smile
to it, and if you are mindful you will see the
sunshine inside the peach. A cloud is inside.
The great Earth is inside. A lot of love and a lot
of hard work are inside. Then, when you eat it,
                        A110B


please be sure to chew only the peach, and
not your projects or your worries. Enjoy eating
your peach. The peach is a miracle. You, also,
are a miracle. So spend time with your food;
every minute of your meal should be happy.
Not many people have the time and the
opportunity to sit down and enjoy a meal like
that. We are very fortunate.
                       A111B


Looking at Your Plate
   This plate of food,
   so fragrant and appetizing,
   also contains much suffering.
This verse has its roots in a Vietnamese folk-
song. When we look at our plate, filled with
fragrant and appetizing food, we should be
aware of the bitter pain of people who suffer
from hunger. Every day, thousands of children
die from hunger and malnutrition. Looking at
our plate, we can see Mother Earth, the farm
workers, and the tragedy of the unequal distri-
bution of food.
   We who live in North America and Europe
are accustomed to eating foods imported
from other countries, whether it is coffee from
Colombia, chocolate from Ghana, or fragrant
                       A112B


rice from Thailand. Many children in these
countries, except those from rich families,
never see the fine products that are put aside
for export in order to bring in money. Some
parents are so poor and starving they have to
sell their children as servants to families who
have enough to eat.
    Before a meal, we can join our palms in
mindfulness and think about those who do not
have enough to eat. Slowly and mindfully, we
breathe three times and recite this gatha, or
verse. Doing so will help us maintain mindful­
ness. May we find ways to live more simply in
order to have more time and energy to change
the system of injustice that exists in the world.
                        A113B


Beginning to Eat
   With the first mouthful, I practice
      the love that brings joy.
   With the second mouthful, I practice
      the love that relieves suffering.
   With the third mouthful, I practice
      the joy of being alive.
   With the fourth mouthful, I practice
      equal love for all beings.
During the time we eat the first mouthful,
we express our gratitude by promising to
bring joy to at least one person. With the
second mouthful, we can promise to help
relieve the pain of at least one person. With
the third mouthful, we are in touch with the
wonders of life. With the fourth mouthful,
                          A114B


we practice inclusiveness and the love that
is characterized by nondiscrimination. After
this, we get in touch with the food and its
deep nature.
                       A115B


Looking at Your
Empty Bowl
   My bowl, empty now,
   will soon be filled with precious food.
   Beings all over the Earth are struggling to live.
   How fortunate we are to have enough to eat.
When many people on this Earth look at an
empty bowl, they know their bowl will continue
to be empty for a long time. So the empty bowl
is as important to honor as the full bowl. We
are grateful to have food to eat and we can
find ways to help those who are hungry.
                          A116B


Finishing Your Meal
   My bowl is empty.
   My hunger is satisfied.
   I vow to live
   for the benefit of all beings.
After eating, don’t rush on to the next thing.
Instead, spend a moment being grateful for
the food you have just eaten and all that came
together to create this moment. Sometimes
we show our gratitude only before we eat,
and then after the meal we move on. But
we are as grateful for having eaten and for
feeling satisfied as we are in the moments of
contemplation before we eat. Living peacefully
and happily is the best way to show our
gratitude and is our greatest gift for the world
and the next generation.
                           A117B


Holding Your Cup of Tea
    This cup of tea in my two hands,
    mindfulness is held perfectly.
    My mind and body dwell
    in the very here and now.
Wherever you are drinking your tea, whether
at work or in a café or at home, it is wonder-
ful to allow enough time to appreciate it. If the
weather is cold, you can feel the warmth of the
cup in your hands. Breathe in and recite the
first line; breathe out and recite the second.
The next inhalation is for the third line, and the
next exhalation is for the fourth line. Breathing
mindfully in this way, we recuperate ourselves
and the cup of tea reclaims its highest place. If
we’re not mindful, it’s not tea that we’re drink-
ing but our own illusions and afflictions. If the
                         A118B


tea becomes real, we become real. When we
are able to truly meet the tea, at that very mo-
ment we are truly alive.


bathing a baby
   Washing the dishes
   is like bathing a baby Buddha.
   The profane is the sacred.
   Everyday mind is Buddha mind.
When you are cleaning the kitchen or washing
the dishes, do it as if you were cleaning
an altar or washing a baby. Washing in this
way, joy and peace can radiate within and
around you. The idea that doing dishes is
unpleasant can occur to us only when we
are not doing them. Once we’re standing in
front of the sink with our sleeves rolled up
and our hands in warm water, it’s really not
bad at all. I enjoy taking my time with each
                        A120B


dish, being fully aware of the dish, the water,
and each movement of my hands. I know that
if I hurry in order to go and have dessert or
a cup of tea, the time of dishwashing will be
unpleasant. That would be a pity, because the
dishes themselves and the fact that I am here
washing them are both miracles!
     If I am incapable of washing dishes joyfully,
if I want to finish them quickly so I can go and
have dessert and a cup of tea, I will be equally
incapable of doing these other things joyfully.
With the cup in my hands, I will be thinking
about what to do next, and the fragrance and
flavor of the tea, together with the pleasure of
drinking it, will be lost. I will always be dragged
into the future, never able to live in the present
moment. The time of dishwashing is as
important as any other time.
                         A121B


Composting our
Food Scraps
    In the garbage, I see a rose.
    In the rose, I see the garbage.
    Everything is in transformation.
    Even permanence is impermanent.
Whenever we throw food in the compost, it
can smell bad. Rotting organic matter smells
especially badly. But it can also become rich
compost for fertilizing the garden. The fragrant
rose and the stinking garbage are two sides
of the same existence. Without one, the other
cannot be. Everything is in transformation. The
rose that wilts after six days will become a part
of the compost. After six months the compost
is transformed into a rose.
                          A122B




a way out
   I know the Earth is my Mother,
   a great living being.
   I vow to protect the Earth,
   and the Earth protects me.
We practice eating mindfully not just to heal
ourselves and our loved ones, but as a way to
help the world out of the difficult situation we
are in. We become aware of what to consume
and what not to consume in order to keep our
bodies, our minds, and the Earth healthy, and
not to cause suffering for ourselves and for
others. Mindful consumption is the way out of
our difficulties, not just our personal difficul-
ties, but also the way out of war, poverty, and
                         A124B


climate crisis. The Earth requires now that we
consume mindfully if we are to survive and
thrive as a species.
                       A125B


                         Parallax Press
                         P.O. Box 7355
                  Berkeley, California 94710
                       www.parallax.org
        Parallax Press is the publishing division of
               Unified Buddhist Church, Inc.
            © 2014 by Unified Buddhist Church
                       All rights reserved
          Printed in The United States of America
          Cover and text design by Debbie Berne
              Illustrations by Jason DeAntonis
This eBook was created using the first print edition from 2014
              eBook ISBN: 978-1-937006-73-0
                    1 2 3 4 5 / 18 17 16 15 14


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nhat Hanh, Thich, author.
  How to eat / Thich Nhat Hanh ; illustrated by Jason
DeAntonis.
    pages cm
  ISBN 978-1-937006-72-3 (paperback)
1. Meditation—Buddhism. 2. Dinners and dining—
Religious aspects—Buddhism. I. Title.
 BQ9800.T5392N45448 2014
 294.3’444—dc23
                                     2014015222


RE L ATE D TITLES
Awakening Joy
by James Baraz and Shoshana Alexander
Be Free Where You Are by Thich Nhat Hanh
Being Peace by Thich Nhat Hanh
Breathe, You are Alive! by Thich Nhat Hanh
The Cosmos in a Carrot by Carmen Yuen
Deep Relaxation by Sister Chan Khong
Happiness by Thich Nhat Hanh
How to Sit by Thich Nhat Hanh
Making Space by Thich Nhat Hanh
Small Bites by Annabelle Zinser
Moments of Mindfulness by Thich Nhat Hanh
Ten Breaths to Happiness by Glen Schneider


  Monastics and laypeople practice the art of mindful
   living in the tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh at retreat
      communities worldwide. To reach any of these
communities, or for information about individuals and
 families joining for a practice period, please contact:
                          Plum Village
                          13 Martineau
                    33580 Dieulivol, France
                     www.plumvillage.org
                  Magnolia Grove Monastery
                         123 Towles Rd.
                     Batesville, MS 38606
              www.magnoliagrovemonastery.org
                      Blue Cliff Monastery
                      3 Mindfulness Road
                     Pine Bush, NY 12566
                 www.bluecliffmonastery.org
                     Deer Park Monastery
                       2499 Melru Lane
                     Escondido, CA 92026
                 www.deerparkmonastery.org
   The Mindfulness Bell, a journal of the art of mindful
living in the tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh, is published
            three times a year by Plum Village.
    To subscribe or to see the worldwide directory of
        Sanghas, visit www.mindfulnessbell.org.


Read Mindfully? Sign up here, breathe, and enjoy reading
our monthly newsletter that offers special discounts, fea-
         ture books, and news from our authors.
                   Visit us on Facebook.
                 Tweet with us on Twitter.
        Post reviews of our books on Goodreads.
Prefer print? Mindful books make the perfect gift. Get the
 paperback version by shopping locally at IndieBound.
              Find the paperback on Amazon.
AZ

Tmcu NHAT HANB is a Vietnamese Zen monk, a former
professor at the University of Saigon, and a noted poet.
He is the author of a number of works on Buddhism
and has published three books in English: Vietnam:
Lotus in a Sea of Fire, Vietnam Poems, and Zen Poems.
He is internationally known as one of the leading
spokesmen of the Vietnamese Buddhist peace move-
ment.
Rosm PmLIP KAPLEAU is the director of The Zen Center
at Rochester, New York, and widely recognized for his
scholarship and practice of Zen. He is the author of
The Three Pillars of Zen and The Wheel of Death: A
Collection of Writings from Zen Buddhist and Other
Sources on Death-Rebirth-Dying.
ALBERT AND }EAN     Low, the translators of this volume
from the French, have studied at The Zen Center at
Rochester for the past seven years. They have also
translated Dr. Hubert Benoit's Let Go.


ZENXEYS
            ,_....
            7
                    _
                    [
 THICH NHAT HANH
 TRANSLATED FROM THE FRENCH
   :BY ALBERT AND JEAN Low
   'WITH AN INTRODUCTION BY
        l?IDLIP KA:PLEA.U
     ANCHOR BOOKS
     Anchor Press/ Doubleday
      Garden City, New York
              1974


         Zen Keys was originally published in
             French as Clefs Pour Le Zen
by ~ditions Seghers © ~ditions Seghers, Paris, 1973.
               The Anchor Books edition
   is the first publication in the English language.
               Anchor Books edition: 1974
                  ISBN: o-385-o8o66-z
 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number 74-3556
           Translation Copyright © 1974 by
             DouBLEDAY & CoMPANY, INc.
 Introduction Copyright © 1974 by Pml.IP KA.PLEAU
                   All Rights Reserved
       Printed in the United States of America-
                       First Edition


                      CONTENTS
INTRODUCTION                                  1
I    Awareness of Being                      17
     The Little Book                         19
     Necessary Awareness                     21
     To Be Mindful                           23
II   A Cup of Tea                            27
     Seeing into One's Own Nature            29
     Bodhidharma's Dictum                    30
     The Buddhist Revolution                 32
     Not-I                                   34
    Things and Concepts                      36
     The Principle of the Interdependence of
       Things                                37
     The Vanity of Metaphysics               38
    Experience Itself                        40
    The Moment of Awakening                  41
III  The Cyprus in the Courtyard             43
    The Language of Zen                      45
     The Finger and the Moon                 47
     "If You Meet the Buddha, Kill Him!"     49


vi                   CONTENTS
   "Go and Wash the Bowl"              51
   The Good Reply                      52
   The Kung-an and Its Function        53
   The Significance of the Kung-an     57
   Chao-Chou's "No!"                   59
   Entering the Circle                 62
   The Mind Must Be Ripe               65
N   Mountains Are Mountains and Rivers
      Are Rivers                       71
   The Mind Seal                       73
   True Mind and False Mind            75
   Reality in Itself                   77
   The Lamp and Lampshade               So
    A Non-Conceptual Experience         82
    The Principle of Non-Duality        84
    Interdependent Relation             88
v   Footprints of Emptiness             91
    The Birth of Zen Buddhism           93
    Zen and the West                    96
    Zen and China                       97
    The Notion of Emptiness             99
    Complementary Notions              101
    Anti-Scholastic Reactions          102
     Return to the Source              103
    The A Which Is Not A Is Truly A    105
    Penetrating the Tathata            108
     Subject and Object                109
     The Three Gates of Liberation     111
     The Eight Negations of Nagarjuna  113
     The Middle Way                    116


                       CONTENTS         vii
    The Vijnanavada School             118
    Classification of the Dharmas      119
    Conscious Knowledge                120
    Method of Vijnanavada              123
    Alaya as the Basis                 126
    The Process of Enlightenment       128
VI  The Regeneration of Man            133
    Monastic Life                      135
    The Retreats                       138
    The Encormter                      140
    The Role of the Laity              141
    The Zen Man and the World of Today 142
    Future Perspectives                144
    Is an Awakening Possible?          147
    Spirituality versus Technology     151
VII Lessons on Emptiness               155




ZEN KEYS



       *
 Introduction
THE PUBLICATION in English of Thich1 Nhat Hanh's
Zen Keys has particular significance for Americans. For
not only is his work the first precise statement of Viet-
namese Buddhism to come to us-we who have such a
deep and tragic karmic connection with Vietnam-but
also Thich Nhat Hanh is not an average Buddhist. He
is a Zen monk, trained and developed in a Zen
monastery, a man who has realized the wisdom and
compassion which are the fruits of Buddhist practice.
In the last fifteen years Thich Nhat Hanh, one of the
leading spokesmen of the Vietnamese Buddhist peace
movement, has taken himself into the market place,
into the twentieth-century hell of war-ravaged Viet-
nam, and brought an "engaged" Buddhism into the
mainstream of life of the Vietnamese masses. In the
face of threats of persecution, imprisonment, and even
death, he has repeatedly spoken out, urging his coun-
trymen to avoid hatred and acrimony and insisting that
the real enemy is not man but the grenades of greed,
anger, and delusion in the human heart. Those Ameri-
cans who believe Buddhism is a world-denying cult of
inner illumination and its practice of meditation a navel-
   1 "Thich" is not, as many suppose, the Vietnamese equiv-
alent of "Venerable," an appellation of Buddhist monks
that roughly corresponds to "Reverend," but is the short-
ened form of "Thich-Ca," the Vietnamese for Shakya, which
is the abbreviation of Shakyamuni, the name by which the
Buddha is known in Asia. It is a family name that monks
assume upon ordination, replacing their own.


                         ZEN KEYS
gazing escape from the suffe1ings of life do not know
Thich Nhat Hanh or the Buddhism about which he
Wlites. It is important that American readers, before
delving deeply into tllis book, be aware of these aspects
of its author's life.
   It is well to note that while Zen Keys often presents
weighty aspects of Buddhist philosophy, Nhat Hanh
begins his book with the concrete, practical aspects of
life in a Zen monastery, where the emphasis is not on
the learning of philosophic concepts but on simple
labor and a life of awareness. For in Zen, intellectual
learning is nothing but the studying of the menu, while
actual practice is the eating of the meal. As Nhat Hanh
says, the truth of existence is revealed through a deep-
ening awareness that comes from living a life of single-
mindedness, of being "awake" in whatever one is
doing, There is no better laboratory for doing this
"aware work" than everyday life, especially one's daily
work.
   Yet we live in a society where the object for so many
is to do as little work as possible, where the work
place, whether office or home, is looked upon as a place
of drudgery and boredom, where work rather than be-
ing a creative and fulfilling aspect of one's life is
seen as oppressive and unsatisfying. How different is
this from Zen! In Zen everything one does becomes a
vehicle for self-realization; every act, every movement
is done wholeheartedly, with nothing left over. In Zen
parlance, everything we do this way is an "expression
of Buddha," and the greater the single-mindedness and
unself-consciousness of the doing, the closer we are to
this realization. For what else is there but the pure act
 -the lifting of the hammer, the washing of the dish,
 the movement of the hands on the typewriter, the pull-
 ing of the weed? Everything else-thoughts of the past,
 fantasies about the future, judgments and evaluations
 concerning the work itself-what are these but shadows


                       INTRODUCTION                      3
 and ghosts :Bickering about in our minds, preventing us
 from entering fully into life itself? To enter into the
 awareness of Zen, to "wake up," means to cleanse the
 mind of the habitual disease of uncontrolled thought
 and to bring it back to its original state of purity and
 clarity. In Zen it is said that more power is generated
 by the ability to practice in the midst of the world than
by just sitting alone and shunning all activity. Thus,
 one's daily work becomes one's meditation room; the
 task at hand one's practice. This is called "working for
 oneself."
    In Zen all labor is viewed with the eye of equality,
 for it is nothing but the workings of a dualistically en-
snared mind that discriminates between agreeable and
 disagreeable jobs, between creative and uncreative
work. It is to root out this weighing and judging that
Zen novices are set to work pulling weeds by hand,
licking envelopes, or doing other seemingly unimpor-
tant "non-creative" work at the start of their training,
 and why the abbot himself often cleans the toilets. For
true creativity is possible only when the mind is empty
and totally absorbed in the task at hand. Only at the
point where one is freed of the weight of self-conscious-
ness in the complete identi£cation with work is there
transcendence and the joy of fulfillment. In this type
of creativity our intuitive wisdom and joy are naturally
brought into play.
   All this does not mean, of course, that attempts at
bettering working conditions and making work more
meaningful, such as we are witnessing today as a reac-
tion against robot-like mechanization of the workplace,
are worthless. But for a worker constantly to resent his
work or his superiors, for him to become sloppy and
slothful in his working habits, for him to become em-
bittered toward life-these attitudes do most hann to
the worker himself and serve little to change his work-
ing conditions. When it's time to work one works, noth-


4                        ZEN KEYS
ing held back; when it's time to make changes one
makes changes; when it's time to revolt one even re-
volts. In Zen everything is in the doing, not in the
contemplating.
   There is one more area in which the untrained, ego-
dominated mind plays thief to man, and this is in terms
of energy. The fatigue that grips many of us at the
end of the workday is not a natural tiredness, but the
product of a day filled with wasted thought and feel-
ings of anxiety and worry, not to speak of anger and
resentments openly expressed or inwardly held. These
negative mental states probably do more to sap energy
than anything else. In contrast, the trained Zen person
moves through his daily round aware and alert. The
task in hand receives its due share of his energy, but
none is wasted in anxiety, fantasy, or smouldering re-
sentment. Even at the end of a full day's work his store
of energy is not exhausted.
   Throughout Zen Keys, Thich Nhat Hanh stresses that
Awareness-and this is more than mere attentiveness
-is everything. It is precisely this lack of Awareness
that is responsible for so much of the violence and suf-
fering in the world today. For it is the mind that feels
itself a separated unit from life and nature, the mind
dominated by an omnipresent Ego-! that lashes out
to destroy and kill, to satisfy its desire for more and
more at whatever cost. It is the unaware mind that
breeds insensitivity to people and things, for it doesn't
see and appreciate the value of things as they are,
only seeing them as objects to be used in satiating one's
own desires. The aware man sees the indivisibility of
existence, the deep complexity and interrelationship of
all life, and this creates in him a deep respect for the
absolute value of things. It is out of this respect for the
worth of every single object, animate as well as in-
animate, that comes the desire to see things used
properly, and not to be heedless or wasteful or destmc-


                      INTRODUCTION                       5
tive. Truly to practice Zen therefore means never to
 leave lights burning when they are not needed, never
to allow water to run unnecessarily in the faucet, never
to leave a scrap of food uneaten. For not only are these
unmindful acts, but they indicate an indifference to
the value of the object wasted or destroyed and to
the efforts of those who made it possible for us: in the
 case of food, the farmer, the trucker, the storekeeper,
the cook, the server. This indifference is the product
of a mind that sees itself as separated from a world of
seemingly random change and purposeless chaos.
    From a Buddhist point of view the doctrines of
Impermanence and Not-1, with which Nhat Hanh
deals, hold the key to resolving the anxiety of this iso-
lated point of view. Anyone alive to the realities of life
cannot but acknowledge, for example, that Imperma-
nence is not a creation of mystical philosophers but
simply a concretization of what "is." In the last hundred
years this process of constant and explosive change on
the social and institutional level has accelerated to a
degree unknown to men of earlier ages. Almost daily
the newspapers report new and dizzying crises in the
world: famines and natural disasters; wars and revolu-
tions; clises in the environment, in energy and in the
political arena; crises in the world of finance and eco-
nomics; crises in the increasing number of divorces and
nervous breakdowns, not to speak of crises in personal
health, in the mounting incidence of heart attacks,
cancer, and other fatal diseases. The average person
looking out on this ever-changing, seemingly chaotic
world sees anything but natural karmic laws at work,
nor does he perceive the unity and harmony under-
lying this constant and inevitable change. If anything,
he is filled with anxiety, with a feeling of hopelessness,
and with a sense that life has no meaning. And because
he has no concrete insight into the true character of
the world or intuitive understanding of it, what else


6                       ZEN KEYS
can he do but surrender to a life of material comfort
and sensual pleasure? And yet right in the midst of
this seemingly meaningless swirling chaos of change
stands the Zen Buddhist. His equanimity is proof
that he knows there is more to life than what the senses
tell him-that in the midst of change there is something
that never changes, in the midst of impermanence there
is something always permanent, in the midst of im-
perfection there is perfection, in chaos there is peace,
in noise there is quiet, and, finally, in death there is
life. So without holding on or pushing away, without
accepting or rejecting, he just moves along with his
daily work, doing what needs to be done, helping wher-
ever he can, or, as the sutras say, "In all things he is
neither overjoyed nor cast down."
    Like the law of Impermanence, the doctrine of the
Not-I is not the product of philosophical speculation
but the expression of the deepest religious experience.
It affirms that contrary to what we think, we are not
merely a body or a mind. If not either or both, what
 are we? The Buddha's answer, stemming from his ex-
 perience of Great Enlightenment, is ego shattering:
    "In truth I say to you that within this fathom-high
 body, with its thoughts and perceptions, lies the world
 and the rising of the world and the ceasing of the world
 and the Way that leads to the extinction of rising and
 ceasing."
    What could be grander or more reassming? Here is
 confirmation from the highest source that we are more
 than this puny body-mind, more than a speck thrown
 into the vast universe by a capricious. fate-that we are
 no less than the sun and the moon and the stars and
 the great earth. Why if we already possess the world
 in fee simple, do we try to enlarge ourselves through
 possessions and power? Why are we "alone and afraid
 in a world I never made," at times self-pitying and
 mean, at other times arrogant and aggressive? It is be-


                        INTRODUCTION                        7
  cause our image of ourselves and our relation to the
  world is a false one. We are deceived by our limited five
  senses and discriminating intellect (the sixth sense in
  Buddhism) which convey to us a picture of a dualistic
 world of self-and-other, of things separated and isolated,
 of pain and struggle, birth and extinction, killing and
 being killed. This picture is untrue because it barely
  scratches the surface. It is like looking at the one eighth
 of an iceberg above the water and being unaware of
 the seven eighths underneath. For if we could see
 beyond the ever-changing forms into the underlying
 reality, we would realize that in essence there is noth-
 ing but harmony and unity and stability, and that this
 perfection is no different from the phenomenal world
 of incessant change and transformation. But our vision
 is limited and our intuitions weak.
    Nor is this the whole of it. Sitting astride the senses
 is a shadowy, phantomlike :figure with insatiable de-
 sires and a lust for dominance. His name? Ego, Ego the
 Magician, and the deadly tricks he carries up his sleeve
 are delusive thinking, greed, and anger. Where he came
from no one knows, but he has surely been around as
long as the human mind. This wily and slippery con-
 jurer deludes us into believing that we can only enjoy
the delights of the senses without pain by delivering
ourselves into his hands.
    Of the many devices employed by Ego to keep us in
his power, none is more effective than language. The
English language is so structured that it demands the
repeated use of the personal pronoun "I" for grammati-
cal nicety and presumed clarity. Actually this I is no
more than a :figure of speech, a convenient convention,
but we talk and act as though it were real and true.
Listen to any conversation and see how the stress in-
variably falls on the "I"-"1 said . ." "I did . . " ..I
like . ." "I hate         " All this plays into the hands
of Ego, strengthening our servitude and enlarging our


8                       ZEN KEYS
sufferings, for the more we postulate this I the more
we are exposed to Ego's never-ending demands.
   We cannot evade responsibility for this state of af-
fairs by claiming ignorance, for the machinations of
Ego, as well as the way to be free of them, have been
pointed out time and again by the wisest of men. After
all, language is our creation. It reflects our values,
ideals, and goals, and the way we see and relate to
the world. There are languages that do not insist on
the constant repetition of the vertical pronoun for clar-
ity or grammatical completeness. In Japanese, for
example, it is possible to make sentences without the
••1" or other personal pronouns in all but a few cases.
The Japanese ideal of personal behavior, which the
language reflects, is modesty and self-effacement, in
theory at least if not always in practice. The strong
assertion of the Ego-I in contemporary American
speech, as well as the decline of the passive voice in
favor of the active, shows that we no longer value
humility and self-effacement, if we ever did.
    Our relative mind of Ego, aided by language, de-
ceives us in other ways. It constantly tempts us into
distinctions and judgments that take us farther and
farther from the concrete and the real into the realm
of the speculative and the abstract. Take the case of
an individual walking alone who suddenly hears the
sound of a bell. Immediately his discriminating mind
evaluates it as beautiful or weird, or distinguishes it
 as a church bell or some other kind. Ideas associated
with a similar sound heard in the past may also intrude
upon the mind, and these are analyzed and compared.
 With each such judgment the expedence of pure hear-
ing becomes fainter and fainter until one no longer
 hears the sound but hears only his thoughts about it.
    Or again, we tacitly agree among ourselves to call
 a certain object a ..tree." We then forget that "tree"
 is an arbitrary concept which in no way reveals the


                       INTRODUCTION                       9
 true identity of this object. What, then, is a tree? A
 philosopher might call it ultimate truth; a botanist, a
 living organism; a physicist, a mass of protons and
 neutrons swirling around a nucleus; an artist, a unique
 shape with distinctive coloring; a carpenter, a potential
 table. To a dog, however, it is nothing but a urinal.
 All descriptions, explanations or analyses are but a look-
 ing from one side at that which has infinite dimensions.
 The true nature of the tree is more than anything that
 can be said about it.
    Similarly, we tinker with time by dividing it into
 past, present, and future and into years, months, days,
 etc. This is convenient, but we need to remember that
this "slicing" is artificial and arbitrary, the product of
our discriminating mind, which discerns only the sur-
face of things. Timelessness is unaccounted for. Thus,
we conceive a world that is conceptual, limited, and
far removed from the actual.
    Speaking of the way in which language falsifies real-
ity, Korzybski, the father of general semantics, points
the accusing finger at the verb "to be" as the chief
offender. "The difficulty with the verb •to be,'" Korzyb-
 ski is quoted as saying, "is that it implies a static,
absolute quality, whereas the law of the universe is
constant change. The moment one says, 'This rose is
red' it has already changed into something else. Be-
sides, to someone else the rose may appear to be pink.
Better to say," adds Korzybski, "·This rose appears to
me as red.' " For Zen, however, a rose is not merely
red, pink, yellow, but it is all colors and at the same
time it is no color. Does not a "Rose is a rose is a rose"
more nearly convey the cosmic grandeur and infinite
beauty of a rose than "This rose appears to me as red"?
But why say anything? Enter the heart of the rose-
smell it, touch it, taste it-and what is there to say ex-
cept perhaps, "Ah, wonderful!" or better yet, simply,
"Ahl" or best of all, just a smile-a smile that flowers.


10                       ZEN KEYS
   The Zen Masters have always been alert to the snare
of language, which "fits over experience like a glove,"
and have used language in such a way as to liberate
their disciples from its bind. \Vhat are these methods?
Hui-neng, the Sixth Pat:Iiarch, once taught: "If some-
body asks you a question expecting 'Yes' for an an-
swer, answer 'No,' and vice versa. If he asks you about
an ordinary man, answer as if he asked about a saint,
and vice versa. By this use of relatives teach him the
doctrine of the Mean. Answer all his questions in this
fashion and you will not fall into error."
    Chao-Chou (Joshu in Japanese), a famous Zen Mas-
ter, was frequently asked, "Is it true that even a dog
has the Buddha-nature?" the implication of the ques-
tion being that if such an exalted being as man has the
pure, all-embracing Buddha-nature, how can such a
lowly creature as a dog also have it? To this question
Chao-Chou sometimes answered, "No, it hasn't" (Mu
in Japanese, Wu in Chinese), and at other times, "Yes,
it has." The questioners may have been genuinely puz-
zled by the statement in the suh·as to the effect that
all beings possess the Buddha-nature, or they may
have been feigning ignorance in order to see how Chao-
Chou would respond. Since Buddha-nature is common
to all existence, logically either answer makes no sense.
But more than logic is involved here. So what is Chao-
Chou up to? Is he flouting the logic of language to show
the monks that absolute truth lies beyond affirmation
 and negation, or is he, by the manner in which he
 utters "Yes!" or "No!" actually thrusting this Buddha-
 nature at his questioners?
    In another well-known episode Nan-Chlian, the
 teacher of Chao-Chou, returned to his monastery one
 day to find some of his monks quarreling about a cat
 sitting in front of them. Presumably they were arguing
 about whether a cat, like a dog, also has the Buddha-
 nature. Sizing up the situation at once and taking ad-


                        INTRODUCTION                  11
 vantage of the occasion to bring home to them the
 truth they were obscuring, Nan-Chiian suddenly seized
 the cat, held it aloft and demanded, "One of you monks,
 give me a word of Zen! If you can I will spare the life
of the cat, otherwise I will cut it in two!" No one knew
what to say, so Nan-Chiian boldly cut the cat in two
 (not really, though; he merely went through the mo-
tions of doing so; "cutting the cat" makes the episode
more vivid and dramatic) . That evening Chao-Chou,
who had also been away, returned. Nan-Chiian told
him what had happened and asked, "Suppose you had
been there. What would you have done?" Without a
word Chao-Chou took off his slippers, placed them on
his head and slowly walked out of the room. "If only
you had been there," said Nan-Chiian admiringly, "you
would have saved the life of the cat."
    Now what is a word of Zen? In Zen there are what
are called live words and dead ones. The admired live
word is the gut word, concrete and vibrant with feel-
ing; the dead word is the explanatory word, dry and
lifeless, issuing from the head. The first unifies; the
second separates and divides. Neither the monks nor
Chao-Chou spoke a word, yet Nan-Chiian put down
the monks and praised Chao-Chou. Why? What was
the significance of Chao-Chou's putting his slippers on
his head and walking out? What did N an-Chiian dem-
onstrate by his act of "cutting" the cat in two? And
say where that dead cat is 1ight now! Aren't we
all dead cats whenever we argue and speculate, make
gratuitous assumptions, jump to conclusions?
   A Chinese Zen Master once gave this problem to his
disciples: "A monk is hanging by his teeth from a
branch high up in a tree. His hands can't reach a
branch above him nor his feet touch a branch under-
neath. On the ground below someone seriously asks,
'\Vhat is the highest truth of Buddhism?' If he opens
his mouth to speak he will fall down and possibly be


1.2                      ZEN KEYS
killed. Yet if he doesn't respond he evades his duty.
What should he do?"
    This is not a teaser designed to titilate the intellect-
far from it. Among other things, it points up a funda-
mental problem in human relations: when to speak and
when to remain silent. For to spin fine words ~nd empty
phrases, to embroider theories and explanationS of one
kind or another can be harmful, even fatal, to one's
personality. But to be silent and not speak when by so
doing we can help a suffering fellow being is craven.
Also, there are many forms of silence. There is the
silence where one doesn't know what to say, the silence
which is the better part of valor, and the silence which
speaks louder than words. Which of these forms of
silence was the monk's, and furthermore, was he an-
swering the question put to him or not?
    These episodes or teaching methods were collected
by later generations of masters and given to their
students to solve as part of their training. They came
to be called koan (kung-an in Chinese; literally "a
public record"); that is, cases that could be relied upon
as pointing to and embodying ultimate truth. They
are not unlike cases at common law that establish
legal precedent. One of the prizes of Zen Keys is a
series of forty-three koan, appearing in English for the
first time, by Tran Thai Tong, a Vietnamese who was
the first king of the Tran Dynasty ( 1225-1400) in
Vietnam. He practiced Zen while still reigning, and
 at the age of forty-one gave up his throne to his son,
 devoting himself thereafter to the most intensive prac-
 tice of Zen. Each of the koan contains a theme, a brief
commentary and a verse, all by Tran Thai Tong.
 Though in the style of the Mumonkan, a well-known
 Chinese book of koan, they nonetheless have a flavor
 distinctly their own.
    Chapter VI of Zen Keys, entitled "The Regeneration
 of Man," may strike sophisticated readers as naive and


                      INTRODUCTION                     13
perhaps even simplistic. Yet it would be a mistake to
pass over lightly what lies behind the simple expres-
sion. Among other things, Thich Nhat Hanh pleads
for a dialogue between East and West based upon
mutual respect and understanding and not on feelings
of Western superiority. These sentiments have been
echoed innumerable times by thoughtful and knowl-
edgeable Asians. We in the West must heed this wise
and earnest voice speaking out of the heart of Asia if
we are to avoid a third world war and the not improb-
able destruction of most of the human race and our
planet earth. Americans especially must listen with
an unprejudiced, believing heart, for not only is our
karma with Vietnam and Asia deep-in one generation
we have fought three land wars there-but to a large
extent the fate of humanity rests upon us. To all but
the obtuse it is clear that the world is at a crossroads,
its very survival at stake.
   We need to recover our basic humanity. Pride in
our technological achievements has replaced love of our
fellow man, as Nhat Hanh observes. We need to purge
ourselves of pride and self-seeking. Above all, we must
regenerate ourselves morally and awaken spiritually,
and this means becoming aware of the true nature of
things and of our responsibilities to the world. The
contamination of our own and the world's environment
and our squandering of dwindling natural resources
through over-consumption, waste, and mismanagement
speak eloquently of our greed and irresponsibility. How
long will the rest of the world stand by while we in
America with only 6 per cent of the world's population
consume 40 per cent of its resources? The energy crisis
we are now experiencing may well be the :first signal
of the revolt against this intolerable situation.
   Many in America are beginning to understand this,
and even our government leaders are saying we must
drastically alter our style of living. Do they really un-


                         ZEN KEYS
derstand the spiritual implications of this? How are we
to uproot the greed, anger, and wrong thinking lying
at the base of our actions? How, in other words, are
we to horizontalize the mast of the inflated national
ego?
   One obvious answer is-through Zen. Not necessar-
ily Zen Buddhism but Zen in its broad sense of a one-
pointed Aware mind; of a disciplined life of simplicity
and naturalness as against a contrived and artificial
one; of a life compassionately concerned with our own
and the world's welfare and not self-centered and ag-
gressive. A life, in short, of harmony with the natural
order of things and not in constant conflict with it.
   The problems of pollution and energy we hear so
much about have always been dealt with in Zen train-
ing. Zen, after all, speaks to the most fundamental pol-
lution of all, the pollution of the human mind. As for
an energy crisis, we have never been without one. The
real energy crisis is an internal one: how to mobilize
the unlimited energy locked within us-how to split
the atom of the mind if you like-and use it wisely for
ourselves and mankind. For it is the release of this
energy that leads to awakening and Awareness.
    As Zen Keys points out, in the East Zen is declining
 due to war and the heavy inroads of materialism and
 technology. In the West, however, it is the disenchant-
ment with the "good" life produced by materialism
 and technology that is largely fueling the current in-
terest in Zen. For together with the realization that
technology makes "major contributions to minor needs
of man" is the awareness that we have become cogs
in an out-of-control wheel, living by a value system
 that does not see man as a human being but merely
 as a consumer of things. If Zen is to find a permanent
 home in America and become a living force in the lives
 of Americans, it is obvious it will have to shed its East-


                        INTRODUCTION                    15
 em cultural accretions and develop new fonns in re-
sponse to the needs of our own culture and society.
This Thich Nhat Hanh and other Zen-oriented Asians
affinn.
   The outline of the new American Zen is already
 emerging. It is away from temple-based Zen and more
in the direction of large centers where monks and lay-
men and women practice the Buddha's way together,
with smaller affiliated communities functioning in
other areas of the country. We also :find many of the
more ..aware" trends in American society being incor-
porated into the life-style of these Zen communities.
Many of these groups are eating natural foods,
gardening organically, and living communally, as well
as including within their Zen training such body-mind
disciplines as hatha yoga and tai-chi chuan. In their
religious life as well, they are beginning to create mean-
ingful ceremonies and rituals appropriate to the Ameri-
can scene and the New Age. Also, in the cities
members of Zen communities, carrying burlap bags,
periodically clean up their neighborhoods, thereby
learning humility and non-attachment. Others take such
menial jobs as housecleaners, dishwashers, and garbage
men for the same reasons. Their lives truly reflect the
principle that '"a man is rich, not in what he possesses
but in what he can do without with dignity."
   It would be a great pity, though, if American Zen
severed its links with the great Asian traditions that
spawned and nourished it; this would in effect be dis-
carding hundreds of years of experiential knowledge of
the human mind. Always there is the danger of throw-
ing out the baby with the bath water.
   As the :first authoritative book in English on the Zen
Buddhist tradition of Vietnam, Zen Keys is one more
bright link in the chain of Asian Zen and for this reason
invaluable.


                       ZEN KEYS
   Albert and Jean Low, the translators of Zen Keys
from the French in which it was written, are no stran-
gers to the world of Zen or to translations of Zen books.
Both have been training in Zen at The Zen Center of
Rochester for the past seven years. Before that they had
studied and practiced several other spiritual traditions.
Their translation of Dr. Hubert Benoit's Let Go evoked
from the author a personal letter of commendation.
When Thich Nhat Hanh was asked by them whether
he wished to review their translation before it was pub-
lished, he wrote: "I have perfect confidence in your
abilities and do not feel it necessary to check your
work." This confidence has not been misplaced. Zen
Keys conveys the authentic "feel" and flavor of Zen.
Understandably so, for it is a loving and knowledgeable
translation.
                                         PHILIP KAI'LEAU
                                     Roshi and Director,
                                         The Zen Center
                                    Rochester, New York


        I
AWARENESS OF BEING




 The Little Book.
I ENTERED THE ZEN MONASTERY when I was seventeen
years old. After a week's adjustment to monastic life,
I presented myself before the monk who had been
put in charge of me to ask him to teach me the Zen
"way... He gave me a small book printed in Chinese
characters and recommended I learn it by heart.
   Having thanked him, I retired to my room with the
small book. This book-which is famous-is divided into
three parts: 1) Essentials of Discipline to Apply Each
Day; 2) Essential Elements of Discipline for a Novice;
3) Exhortation of the Zen Master Kuai Chan.
   There is no Zen philosophy in this book. The three
parts treat practical problems only. The first teaches
the method of mind control and concentration; the
second sets down the required discipline and behavior
of monastic life; the third part is a very beautiful piece
of writing, an exhortation addressed to Zen disciples
to encourage them in their meditations so that they
will take to heart the fact that their time and life are
precious and should not be vainly dissipated.
   I was assured that not only novices of my age must
start with this book-which is called Luat Tieu in Viet-
namese (Little Manual of Discipline)-but that monks
of even thirty or forty years of age must also follow the
prescriptions of Luat Tieu.
   Before entering the monastery, I had already re-
ceived a little Western education, and I had the im-
pression that the method of teaching the doctrine in
the monastery was old-fashioned.


20                      ZEN KEYS
   First it was necessary to learn by heart the whole
book; then people were to engage in its practice, with-
out even having been given the fundamental princi-
ples of the theory. I unburdened myself to another
novice who had already been there two years. "It is the
way followed here," he told me. "If you want to learn
Zen, you must accept this way." I had to resign myself
to it.
   The first part of the Little Manual, "Essentials of
Discipline to Apply Each Day," contains only formu-
lations aimed at bringing about Awareness of Being
( samyaksrmrti). Each act of the novice must be ac-
companied by a particular thought. For example, when
I wash my hands, I must evoke this thought: "Washing
my hands, I wish that the whole world should have
very pure hands, capable of holding the Truth of En-
lightenment." When I am sitting in the Meditation Hall,
I must think: "In this upright position, I wish that
all living beings should be seated on the throne of per-
fect enlightenment, their mind purified of all illusion
and of all error." And even when I am in the toilet, I
say to myself: "Being in the toilet, I wish that all living
beings might rid themselves of greed, hatred, igno-
rance, and all other defilements."
   ••Essentials of Discipline to Apply Each Day" con-
tains a limited number of similar thoughts. A ready in-
telligence should be able to make up others to be used
on different occasions. Those proposed by the Manual
are only examples; the practitioner can modify them,
even change them and make them into others more
suited to his needs and to his physiological and mental
conditions. Suppose I should be about to use the tele-
phone and I wish to evoke in my mind a thought capa-
ble of keeping me in a state of Awareness. This thought
is not found in the Little Manual because at the time
the book was written there were no telephones. I
could then invent a thought like the following: "Using


                  AWARENESS OF BEING                   21
the telephone, I wish that all living beings should free
themselves of doubt and prejudice in order that com-
munication between them should be readily estab-
lished."
   When I was seventeen years o1d, I thought that the
Little Manual was designed for children or for people
on the fringes of Zen. I did not attach any more im-
portance to this method than as preparation. Today,
twenty-nine years later, I know that the Little Manual
is the very essence of Zen and Buddhism.
       *
Necessary Awareness
I REMEMBER A SHORT CONVERSATION between Buddha
and a philosopher of his time.
   "I have heard tell of Buddhism as a doctrine of en-
lightenment. What is its method? In other words, what
do you do every day?''
   "We walk, we eat, we wash ourselves, we sit
down . . ."
   "What is there that is special in those actions? Every-
one walks, eats, washes himself, sits down . . ."
   "Sir, there is a difference. When we walk, we are
aware of the fact that we walk; when we eat, we are
aware of the fact that we eat, and so on. When others
walk, eat, wash themselves, or sit down, they are not
aware of what they do."
   This conversation clearly expresses the Awareness of
Being which in Buddhism is the secret by which man
"sheds light" on his existence, produces the power of


22                      ZEN KEYS
concentration, and, finally, brings wisdom to fruition.
Awareness of Being is the backbone of the Buddhist
method.
   To light existence? Yes, and this is the point of de-
parture. If I live without having Awareness of this life,
that amounts to not having lived. I can then say, as did
Albert Camus in his novel The Outsider, I live "as one
dead." The ancients used to say, "One lives in forget-
fulness, one dies in a dream." How many people there
are among us and around us who "live as though dead"!
That is why the first thing to do is to come back to life,
to wake up, to be aware of what we are, of what we
do. The one who eats, who is he? And who the one who
drinks? The one who sits in meditation? And who is he,
the one who consumes his life in forgetfulness and
negligence?
   To produce the power of concentration? Yes, because
Awareness of Being is a discipline that helps man to
realize himself. Man is a prisoner of his social sphere.
He is governed by social events. He disperses himself.
He loses himself. He cannot return to his integral state.
In this case, to be aware of what one does, of what
one says, of what one thinks, is to begin to resist
invasion by the surroundings and by all the errors to
which forgetfulness gives birth. When the lamp of
Awareness of Being is lit, moral conscience lights up;
and the passage of thoughts and emotions likewise is
lit up. Respect for oneself is re-established, the shadows
of illusion can no longer invade a man. From this fact,
spiritual force is concentrated and develops. You
wash your hands, you dress yourself, you perform every-
day actions as before; but now you are aware of all
your actions, words, and thoughts.
   This prescription is not only designed for a novice:
this prescription is for everyone, including the great
Enlightened Ones, even Buddha himself. And, in


                  AWARENESS OF BEING                   23
fact, are not power of concentration and spiritual force
themselves the characteristics of the great men of hu-
manity?
   To bring wisdom into bloomP Yes, because the ul-
timate aim of Zen is the vision of reality, acquired by
the power of concentration. This wisdom is Enlighten-
ment, the perception of the truth of being and of life.
This is what all practitioners of Zen wish to attain.
To Be Mindful
Tms PROCEss-To Light Existence, Produce the Power
of Concentration, and Bring Wisdom to Blo~is called
in Buddhism the "Process of the Three Studies." Sila,
Samadhi, and Prafna (Discipline, Concentration, and
Wisdom) are the Sanskrit terms. The word "Sila" (Dis-
cipline) must here be taken to signify Awareness of
Being. Sila does not denote rules to prevent immoral
actions. To be attached to rules without grasping their
meaning is to take a means for an end; it is to fall into
what Buddhism calls attachment to rules, one of the
major obstacles to knowledge. It is not by virtue of
moral conduct that one can realize Wisdom, but by
maintaining body and mind in the permanent Aware-
ness of Being. That is why the application of thoughts
leading to Awareness of Being is called the "Essentials
of Discipline."
   When a scientist works in his laboratory, he does not
smoke, he does not eat sweets, and does not listen to
the radio. He abstains not because he thinks that these


                           ZEN KEYS
 things are sins, but because he knows that they impede
 the perfect concentration of his mind on the object of
 his study. It is much the same in Zen Discipline: the
 observance of this discipline must help the practitioner
 to live in Awareness of Being; it does not lead to moral
objectives.
    Zen Wisdom cannot be obtained by the intellect:
study, hypothesis, analysis, synthesis. The practitioner
of Zen must use all of his entire being as an instrument
 of realization; the intellect is only one part of his being,
and a part that often pulls him away from living reality,
the very object of Zen. It is for this reason that the
Little Manual does not have as its object the prepara-
tion of a theory-it introduces the practitioner directly
into the Way of Zen.
   In the monastery, the practitioner does everything:
he carries water, he looks for firewood, prepares food,
cultivates the garden. • . . Although he learns the way
to sit in the Zen position and to practice concentration
and meditation in this position, he must strive to re-
main constantly aware of being, even when he carries
water, cooks, or cultivates the garden. He knows that
to carry water is not only a useful action, it is also
to practice Zen. If one does not know how to practice
Zen while carrying water, it is useless to live in a mon-
astery. The Little Manual, as I have already said, in-
troduces the practitioner directly into the world of Zen,
even if the practitioner seemingly does exactly the
same things as those who do not practice the way.
   The Zen Master observes his student in silence,
while the latter tries to "light'~ his existence. A student
may have the impression that not enough attention
is paid to him, but in reality his ways and his acts
cannot escape the observation of the Master. The Mas-
ter must know if his student is or is not "awake." In the
monastery, one must be aware of all that one does. If,
for example, the student shuts the door in a noisy way,


                  AWARENESS OF BEING
he thus proves that he is not aware of his being. Virtue
does not lie exactly in the fact of closing the door gently,
but in the awareness of the fact that one is in the proc-
ess of closing the door. In this case, the Master simply
summons his student and reminds him that he must
close the door gently; that it is necessary for him "to be
mindful" of himse1f. He does this not only in order that
the silence of the monastery be respected, but in order
to show the student that he is not in keeping with the
way of Zen; this explains the absence of "acts of ma-
jestic behavior" ( uy nghi) and "subtle gestures" ( te
hanh) . It is said that in Buddhism there are ninety
thousand "subtle gestures" the novice must practice.
These gestures and acts are the expression of the pres-
ence of the Awareness of Being. All that one says,
thinks, and does in this state of conscious awareness is
described as having "the taste of Zen."
   If a practitioner hears himself reproached for lacking
the "taste of Zen" in what he says and does, he should
recognize that he is being reproached for living without
Awareness of Being.




     II
A CUP OF TEA




 Seeing into One's Own Nature
 IN MY MONASTERY, as in all those belonging to the Zen
 tradition, there is a very :fine portrait of Bodhidharma.
 It is a Chinese work of art in ink, depicting the Indian
 monk with sober and vigorous features. The eyebrows,
 eyes, and chin of Bodhidharma express an invincible
 spirit. Bodhidharma lived, it is said, in the :fifth cen-
 tury A.D. He is considered to be the First Patriarch of
 Zen Buddhism in China. It might be that most of the
 things that are reported about his life have no histori-
 cal validity; but the personality as well as the mind of
 this monk, as seen and described through tradition, have
made him the ideal man for all those who aspire to Zen
 enlightenment. It is the picture of a man who has come
 to perfect mastery of himself, to complete freedom in
relation to himself and to his surroundings-a man hav-
ing that tremendous spiritual power which allows him
to regard happiness, unhappiness, and all the vicissi-
tudes of life with an absolute calm. The essence of this
personality, however, does not come from a position
taken about the problem of absolute reality, nor from an
indomitable will, but from a profound vision of his
own mind and of living reality. The Zen word used
here signifies "seeing into his own nature." When one
has reached this enlightenment, one feels all systems
of erroneous thought crushed inside oneself. The new
vision produces in the one enlightened a deep peace, a
great tranquility, as well as a spiritual force character-
ized by the absence of fear. Seeing into one's own na-
ture is the goal of Zen.


30                      ZEN KEYS
 Bodhidharma's Dictum
BUT TO SEE INTO ONE'S OWN NATURE is not the fruit of
studies and research. It is accession to Wisdom through
a life lived in the very heart of reality; in a perfect
awareness of being. Thus, one might say that Zen is
against all speculation and all writing. Words do not
carry wisdom. According to Bodhidharma, Zen is:
   a special transmission outside the scriptures, not
   based on words and letters, a direct pointing to the
   heart of man in order that he might see into his
   own nature and become an enlightened being.
   In the fifth century, when Bodhidharma came to
China, the Chinese Buddhists were entering an era
of studying Buddhist texts that had just been translated
in the preceding period (a period that might be charac-
terized as being that of translations). Buddhists were
occupied more with systematizing the ideas and with
forming particular Buddhist sects than with practicing
meditation. The dictum thrust forward by Bodhidharma
was, therefore, like a clap of thunder which awak-
ened the Buddhists and brought them to the practical
and experiential spirit of Buddhism.
   It is because it is like thunder that Bodhidharma's
dictum seems excessive. Let us briefly examine the re-
lations between Zen and Indian Buddhism, and we shall
see that Zen is none other than Buddhism.


                        A CUP OF TEA                    31
    Bodhidharma said:
   Zen has been transmitted by the Buddha and has
    no relation with the scriptures and doctrines that
    you are in the process of studying [a special
    transmission outside the scriptures].
   At first sight, it seems then that Zen must be a secret
teaching, transmitted from Master to student through
the generations; a doctrine that is not carried on by
writing and cannot be discussed, commented upon, or
spread-a spiritual heritage that no one can understand
except the initiates. One would not even be able to
talk about teaching it, since Zen cannot be taught,
that is, taught through symbols; it passes directly from
master to student, from "mind to mind." The image
employed here is a seal imprinted on a mind; not a
seal of wood, copper, or ivory, but a "mind seal." The
word "transmission" thus denotes here the transmission
of this mind seal. Zen is itself a mind seal. The things
that one might find in the enormous literature of Bud-
dhist scriptures might be of Buddhism, but not of Zen
Buddhism. Zen is not found in the scriptures, because
Zen "is not founded on writing." Such is the interpre-
tation given to Bodhidharma's dictum by the majority
of Zen commentators.
   In reality, to see in the principle "not based on writ-
ings" that which characterizes Zen and differentiates
it from all the other Buddhist sects is to ignore the very
close ties existing between Zen and primitive Buddhism
-above all the Mahayana Buddhist system-as well
as the historical facts concerning the birth and develop-
ment of Zen. The negative atttitude toward the de-
scription of ultimate reality by words is common to all
Buddhist doctrine. The dictum used by Bodhiclharma
is only a drastic way of bringing people to this original
altitude which underlines the importance of direct


                        ZEN KEYS
spiritual experience and discredits intellectual specu-
lation.
The Buddhist Revolution
 BunnmsM WAS BORN toward the end of the sixth cen-
tury B.c. The word "Buddhism" comes from the San-
skrit verb Budh, which in the Vedic scriptures fore-
mostly signifies "to know," then "to wake up." The one
who knows, the one who wakes up, is called Buddha.
The Chinese have transiated the word "Buddha" as
"the awakened man." Buddhism is, therefore, a doctrine
of awakening, a doctrine of knowledge.
   But Buddha made it known from the beginning that
this awakening, this knowledge, can only be acquired
by the practice of the "Way" and not by studies and
speculation. At the same time one catches sight of
another particular aspect of Buddhism: salvation, in
Buddhism, comes about by wisdom and not by grace
or melit.
   The entry of Buddhism into Indian history must be
considered as a new vision concerning man and life.
This vision was expounded first as a reaction against
the Brahmanic conception that dominated Indian soci-
ety at the time. This is why the doctrine of Buddhism,
 reacting 'against the Brahmanic thought and society, is
 ve1y clearly of a revolutionary nature.
    What was this society? From the intellectual stand-
point, the authority of the Brahmanic tradition domi-
 nated all: the Vedic revelation, the divine supremacy


                     A CUP OF TEA                     33
 of Brahma, and the miraculous power of sacrifice, were
 the three principal fundamentals one could not dis-
 pute. From the standpoint of belief, Brahma, Vishnu,
 and Shiva were the object of all the cults. From the
 philosophical standpoint, the thoughts of the Vedas and
 Upanishads were the basis of all philosophical concepts.
 Sankhya, Yoga, and the six philosophical schools were
 born and were developed upon this basis. Buddhism was
 thoroughly opposed to this Vedic authority and to all
 the points of view stemming from it. From the stand-
point of belief, Buddhism rejected all deisms and all
forms of sacrifice. From the social point of view, Bud-
dhism combated the caste system, accepting the Un-
 touchables in the Orders at the same level as a king.
 (Buddha, having met an Untouchable who carried ex-
crement, brought him to the edge of the river to wash
him, then afterwards took him with him and accepted
him into the Buddhist community, despite the protests
of the others.) From the intellectual standpoint, it
rigorously rejected the concept of I ( Atma), which
is the very heart of Brahmanism.
   One can see how Buddha reacted against the cur-
rents of thought of his time by reading, for example,
the Brahmajasutta, which is found in the series The
Long Discourses ( Dighanikaya) . His opposition to Brah-
manic thought must be regarded primarily as a reac-
tion, a revolt, rather than as an effort to present the
Buddhist point of view. This total opposition to Brah-
manism does not signify that all the thoughts contained
in the Vedas and Upanishads are erroneous or contrary
to truth. This opposition is a clap of thunder aimed at
giving a great shock to change the customs, the man-
ners, and the modes of thought that enclosed man in
an impasse.
   It is because Brahmanism considers the concept of
Atma (I) as a basis for its methodology and its ontol-


34                      ZEN KEYS
ogy, that Buddha expounded the doctrine of the
Anatma (the Not-!). What did Buddha mean? This 1 of
which you speak, nv matter whether it be the great I
or small I, is only a pure concept which does not cor-
respond to any reality. That is what Buddha meant.
   If we think in ontological terms, we shall say that
the doctrine of the Not-! was considered by Buddha
as a truth opposing the doctrine of I, which is wrong.
But if we think in methodological terms, we shall see
immediately that the notion of Not-1 is an antidote
aimed at liberating man from the prison of dogma. Be-
fore examining the problem of truth and falsehood, it
is necessary to examine the problem of the attitude
and the method. This allows us to say that the notion
of Not-! was born initially in reaction to the notion of
the Brahmanic I, and not as a discovery which had
nothing to do with the thought of the time. Yes, ini-
tially, it was a simple reaction; but one that was to
serve later as the point of departure for the presenta-
tion of a new Wisdom.
       *
Not-I
DRASTIC METHODS      are very frequently used in Bud-
dhism to upset habits and prejudices. This characteristic
trait of Buddhism is manifested clearly in Zen.
   Buddha used the notion of the Not-! to upset and
to destroy; but, later, he used it to expound his doc-
trine of Awakening. It can thus also be said that the
notion of Not-! is the point of departure of Buddhism.


                      A  CUP OF TEA
                                                         35
    The Buddhist scriptures often speak of the "Not-I"
 nature of all phenomena. Things do not possess an 'T'
 ( Sarva dharmas nairatmya) . This means that nothing
 contains in itself an absolute identity. This means a re-
 jection of the principle of identity which is the basis of
formal logic. According to this principle, A must be A,
B must be B, and A cannot be B. The doctrine of the
 Not-I says: A is not A, B is not B, and A can be B. This
is something that shocks people; something that invites
people to re-examine themselves.
    In order to understand the expression Not-I (An-
atma), the concept of Impermanence (Anitya) in
Buddhism must be considered.
    All is impermanent, because all is in a state of per-
petual change. A thing does not remain the same during
two consecutive ksanas (the ksana being the shortest
period of time in Buddhism) . It is because things
transfonn themselves ceaselessly that they cannot main-
tain their identity, even dming two consecutive ksanas.
Not being able to fix their identity, they are Not-!;
that is to say, devoid of absolute identity. Not having
an identity, A is no longer the A of the preceding ksana;
this is why one says that A is not A. Impermanence is
only another name for Not-I. In time, things are im-
permanent; in space they are devoid of identity. Not
only are physical phenomena impennanent and devoid
of identity, but the same is true even for physiological
phenomena, as for example our body, and psychic
phenomena, such as our feelings.
    However, Impermanence and Absence of Identity
are by no means truths taken from reality with the
intent to found a doctrine of Action. Many people,
who are not conscious of this fact, say that Anatma
and Anitya are the basis for a negative and pessimistic
moral doctrine. To say, "If all things are impermanent


                          ZEN  KEYS
and devoid of identity, it is not worth the trouble to
struggle so hard in order to obtain them," is to mis-
understand the true spirit of Buddhism. We know that
Buddhism aims at salvation through the means of Wis-
dom. It is therefore necessary to examine the Buddhist
doctrine from the point of view of the problem of un-
derstanding, and not hastily to embrace a philosophy
of Action. lmpetmanence and Absence of Identity must
be studied as guiding plinciples with a view to Under-
standing.
       *
Things and Concepts
THE PRINCIPLE of Non-Identity btings to light that
enormous chasm that opens between things and the
concept we have of them. Things are dynamic and
living, while our concepts of them are static and poor.
Look, for example, at a table. We see the table; we
have the impression that the table in itself and the con-
cept of table that is in our mind are identical. In reality,
what we believe to be a table is nothing other than our
concept of the table, while the table in itself is some-
thing else entirely. Some scant notions-wood, of brovm
color, hard, being three feet high, old, etc.-bling about
this concept of a table in us. The table in itself is not
so scanty in reality. For example, a nuclear physicist
would tell us that the table is not a piece of static mat-
 ter, that it is constituted of a multitude of atoms whose
 electrons move like a swarm of bees, and that if we


                       A CUP OF TEA                       37
 could put these atoms next to each other, we would
have a mass of matter smaller than a finger. This table,
in reality, is always in transformation; in time as well
 as in space it is connected to other things that we might
 call non-table. It depends upon them so closely that if
we should take from the table all that which is non-
table, the table itself would no longer exist.
    The forest, the tree, the saw, the hammer, the cab-
inetmaker, for example, are part of this non-table, and
there are still other elements that are in relation to
this non-table, such as the parents of the cabinetmaker,
the bread that they eat, the blacksmith who makes the
hammer, and so on. If we know how to look at the
table in its relationship with all this non-table, we can
see in it the presence of all the non-table. We can say
that the existence of the table implies, or demonsb·ates,
the existence of that which is non-table; that is to say, of
the entire universe. This idea is expressed in the
Avatamsaka system of Buddhism by the notion of the
"multi-inter-origin" of things. A notion in which the
one is equal to the all, and the all equal to the one.
The Principle of the Interdependence of Things
THE PRINCIPLE of cause and effect is called in Buddhism
the pdnciple of "inter-origin." The birth, growth, and
decline of things depend on a number of conditions
and not upon a single one. These conditions are called
pratyayas. The presence of a thing (dharma) implies


                            ZEN KEYS
the presence of all other things. The enlightened man
sees this thing not as a separate entity but as a com-
plete manifestation of reality. A Vietnamese Zen monk
of the twelfth century, Dao Hanh, said, "If it is of
existence, everything exists, even a speck of dust; if it
is of emptiness, eve1ything is empty, even this universe."
   The doctrine of Non-Identity aims at bringing to light
the inter-dependent nature of things; at the same time
it demonstrates to us the fact that the concepts we
have of things, as well as the categories such as
existence/non-existence, unity/plurality, etc. do not
faithfully reflect reality and cannot convey it. It shows
us that the world of concepts is other than the world
of reality in itself. It forewarns us that conceptual 1-"'lowl-
edge is not the perfect instrument for studying truth;
that our words are incapable of expressing the truth
about that which concerns ultimate reality.
 The Vanity of Metaphysics
THESE PRELIMINARY REMARKS have a direct relation-
ship with Zen; we can say that they constitute the
point of departure of Buddhism and at the same time
of Zen Buddhism.
   If concepts do not represent reality, conceptual
knowledge of reality must be considered elToneous.
That is demonstrated many times in Buddhism. Buddha
always told his disciples not to spend their time and en-
ergies in metaphysical speculation. Each time he was


                     A CUP OF TEA                       39
asked a question of a metaphysical kind, he remained
silent. He directed his disciples toward practical efforts.
Questioned one day about the problem of the infinity
of the world he said, "Whether the world be finite or
infinite, whether it be limited or unlimited, the prob-
lem of your salvation remains the same." Another
time he said, "Suppose a person should be shuck by a
poisoned arrow and that the doctor wished to take out
this arrow immediately. Suppose that the wounded per-
son did not want the arrow removed before having re-
ceived certain information: who had shot it? what is the
name of the bowman? his age? who are his parents?
for what reason had he fired on him? and so on. What
do you think would happen? If one were to wait until
all these questions had been answered, I fear that the
person would be dead beforehand." Life is short; it
must not be spent in endless metaphysical speculations
which will not be able to bring us the Truth.
   But if conceptual knowledge is fallible, what other
instrument shall we use in order to grasp reality?
According to Buddhism, one can only reach reality
through direct expe1ience. Study and speculation are
based on concepts. In conceptualizing we cut up reality
into small pieces which seem to be independent of one
another. This manner of conceiving things is called
imaginative and discriminative knowledge ( vikalpa)
in the Vijnanavada Mahayanist sect. The faculty which,
on the contrary, directly experiences reality without
passing through concepts is called non-discriminative
and non-imaginative Wisdom ( nirvikalpajnana). This
Wisdom is the fruit of meditation. It is a direct and per-
fect knowledge of reality, a form of knowledge in which
one does not distinguish subject and object, a form of
knowledge that cannot be conceived by the intellect
and expressed by language.


       *
Experience Itself
SuPPOSE THAT WE ARE TOGETHER          at my house and I
invite you to have a cup of tea. You take your cup, you
taste the tea which is contained in the cup, and you
drink a little of it. You seem to take pleasure in the
tea. You put your cup on the table and we continue
our conversation.
   Now, suppose that I should ask you what you think
of the tea. You are going to use your memory, your
concepts, and your vocabulary in order to give a de-
scription of your sensation. You will say, for example,
"It is very good tea. It is the best Tieh Kuan Ying tea,
manufactured at Taipei. I can still taste it in my mouth.
It refreshes me." You could express your sensation in
many other ways. But these concepts and these words
describe your direct experience of the tea; they are not
this experience itself. Indeed, in the direct experience
of the tea, you do not make the distinction that you
are the subject of the experience and that the tea is
its object; you do not think that the tea is the best, or
the worst, of the Tieh Kuan Ying of Taipei. There is
no concept or word that frames this experience, this
pure sensation resulting from experience. You can give
as many descriptions as you wish, but it is only you
who witness this direct experience of the tea that I
have given you. When someone listens to you he can
 only recreate for himself a certain sensation, basing this
 on experiences that he might have had himself in the
 past concerning tea. And you yourself, when you try


                      A CUP OF TEA                    41
to describe your experience, are already no longer in
the experience. In the experience, you are one with the
tea, there is no distinction between subject and object,
there is no evaluation, there is no discrimination. This
pure sensation can be presented as an example of non-
discriminative knowledge. It is that which introduces us
to the heart of reality.
       *
The Moment of Awakening
To REACH TRUTH is not to accumulate knowledge, but
to awaken to the heart of reality. Reality reveals itself
complete and whole at the moment of awakening. In
the light of this awakening, nothing is added and noth-
ing is lost; but emotions that are based on concepts can
no longer affect a man. If Bodhidharma is the ideal man,
it is because his image is that of a hero who has broken
the chains of illusion that enclose man in the world of
emotions. The hammer that is used to break these
chains is the practice of Zen. The moment of awakening
is marked by an outburst of laughter. But this is not
the laughter of someone who suddenly acquires a great
fortune; neither is it the laughter of one who has won
a victmy. It is, rather, the laughter of one who, after
having painfully searched for something for a long time,
finds it one moming in the pocket of his coat.
   One day Buddha was standing in front of the as-
sembly at Vautours Mountain. Everyone was waiting
for the daily lesson, but he remained silent. After some


                        ZEN KEYS
time, he lifted his right hand which held a flower, all
the while looking at the assembly without saying a
single word. Each looked at him without understanding
at all. Only one monk looked at Buddha with sparkling
eyes and smiled. Buddha then said, "I possess the
treasure of the vision of the perfect doctrine, I have
the marvelous spirit of Nirvana, I have the reality
without impurity, and I have transmitted them to
Mahakasyapa." The monk who smiled was, indeed, Kas-
yapa, a great disciple of Buddha.
   Kasyapa reached the Moment of Awakening when
Buddha raised his flower. At the same time he received
the "mind seal" of Buddha, to use the Zen terminology.
Buddha had transmitted his Wisdom from mind to
mind; he had taken the seal of his mind and had im-
printed it on the mind of Kasyapa. This smile .of Kas-
yapa is not a great outburst, but it is of the same na-
ture as the outburst of laughter of the Zen Masters.
Kasyapa arrived at Awakening thanks to a flower; there
 are Zen Masters who have obtained their Awakening
 through a resounding cry and others through a terrible
kick.


      III
  *    *
 THE CYPRUS IN
THE COURTYARD




        *
 The Language of Zen
THE ESSENCE OF ZEN is Awakening. This is why one does
not talk about Zen, one experiences it. But Awakening
is a great phenomenon that radiates like the sun. The
"awakened" man is recognizable by particular signs.
First of all is liberty; he does not allow himself to be
influenced by the vicissitudes· of life, by fear, joy,
anxiety, success, failure, etc. Then there is the spiritual
force that shows itself in calmness, the ineffable smile,
and serenity. It can be said without exaggeration that
the smile, the look, the word, and action of the awak-
ened man constitute the language of Awakening. This
language is employed by Zen Masters to guide prac-
titioners. A Zen Master uses concepts and words like
everyone else; but he is neither conditioned nor cap-
tivated by these concepts and these words. The lan-
guage of Zen always aims at destroying the habits of
those who only know how to think by concepts. It tends
to provoke crises, whose function it is to bring to
fruition the precious moment of Awakening.
   Let us examine two fragments of conversation:
    (1)   Chao-Chou (to Nan-Chiian): What is the
                            Way?
          N an-Chiian: It is our everyday mind.
          Chao-Chou:     In that case, is it necessary to
                           realize it?
          Nan-Chiian:    The intention to realize the
                           Way is something opposed
                            to the Way itself.


                        ZEN KEYS
         Chao-Chou: If one has no intention, how
                          can one know that it is the
                          Way?
         Nan-Chiian:    The Way does not depend on
                          what one knows or on what
                          one does not know. If one
                          knows it, this knowledge is
                          only made up of specula-
                          tive ideas. If one does not
                          know it, this ignorance is
                          not different from inani-
                          mate things. If you get to
                          the state of non-doubt, you
                          will see open in front of
                          you an unlimited universe
                          in which things are only
                          one. How can one discrim-
                          inate in this undiscriminat-
                          ing world?
   (2)   A monk asks Zen Master Chao-Chou: What
            was Bodhidharma's intention when he
            came to China?
          Chao-Chou: Look at the cyprus in the
            courtyard.
   The first conversation aims at showing the obstacles
created by conceptual methods and, at the same time,
engaging the questioner in the way of non-discrimina-
tive realization. The second conversation aims at shak-
ing loose the habit of conceptualization .and creating
the shock necessary to bring about Awakening. H the
mind of the man is ripe, Enlightenment can occur in
him.
   A Zen Master who has obtained Awakening pos-
sesses an extraordinary capacity to understand the men-
tality of students working under his direction. It is be-


              THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                47
cause he well understands the mentality of his disciple
that he can recommend to him effective methods to
initiate him into the world of Awakening. The language
of Zen is one of these ways. Aimed at helping the prac-
titioner, this language must:
    1.   Possess the power of liberating the man from
           prejudices and attachments to knowledge;
   .2.   Be suitable to the man to whom it is ad-
           dressed;
    3·   Be a skillful and effective method.
        *
 The Finger and the Moon
As     REALITY CAN ONLY BE· LIVED and experienced,
Buddhist doctrine would never have as an aim the de-
scription of reality; the doctrine serves only as a method,
as a guide, to the practitioner in his experience of
this reality.
   The Sutra "The Perfect Awakening" (Maha-
vaipulyapurnabuddha sutra) says: "All doctrines taught
by Buddha must be understood as a finger pointing to
the moon." To show the moon, we make use of the
finger; but we must not confuse the finger and the
moon, because the finger is not the moon. Skillful means
-in Sanskrit, upaya-are things created with the inten-
tion of guiding people in their efforts toward Awaken-
ing. If these means are taken as ends, that is to say, as
the description of Awakening or as Awakening itself,
they cannot play their useful role; on the contrary, they
become a sort of permanent prison. As soon as one


                         ZEN KEYS
thinks that the finger is the moon itself, one no longer
wants to look in the direction the finger is pointing.
    The "skillful means" here can be a verbal declara-
tion or a simple gesture. The great Masters possess
what Buddhism calls the Wisdom of the Skillful Ways
 ( Upaya-jnana), or capacity to create and employ dif-
ferent methods suitable for different mentalities and
different occasions. The conversations between Chao-
Chou and Nan-Chiian, for example, are some "skillful
means." The cyprus in the courtyard and the :Bower
shown by Buddha in silence are equally skillful means,
    But these means are only truly skillful if they are
suitable to the particular circumstances. They must be
effective and for this reason should respond exactly to
the real needs and to the particular mentality of those
whom they seek to guide. If the Master is not capable
of understanding the mentality of the student, he will
no longer be able to create these skillful and effective
means. A single means cannot be employed in all cir-
cumstances. Thus, the Master must create many
others by relying on his understanding of the mentality
of individuals or of groups-in Buddhism one speaks of
the 84,000 entrances to reality. Zen Buddhism under-
lines the extreme importance of the effectiveness and
 the skillfulness of the means employed by Zen Masters
seeking to bring to fruition the Awakening of their dis-
 ciples.


       *
 cclf You Meet the Buddha, Kill Himr
 ONE OF THE GREATEST POTENTIALITIES of the skillful
means is to free beings from their prison of knowledge
 and prejudice. Man is attached to his knowledge, to his
habits and to his prejudices; the language of Zen must
be capable of liberating him. In Buddhism, knowledge
constitutes the greatest obstacle to Awakening. This
obstacle is called the obstacle of knowledge. What is
referred to here is knowledge based on concepts. If
we are trapped by this knowledge, we shall not have
the possibility of realizing Awakening in us. The Sutra
of the Hundred Parables tells the story of a young
widower who was living with his five-year-old son and
who, one day, returned home to find his house burned
down and his child lost. Near the destroyed house there
was the charred corpse of a child that he believed
was his, and in this belief he wept over his child, then
set about the cremation of the body, according to the
Indian rites. He kept the ashes of the child in a bag
which he carried with him day and night, whether he
was working or whether he was resting. Now, his
son had not perished in the fire but had been taken off
by brigands. One day the child escaped and returned to
his father's house. He arrived at midnight, when his
father was about to go to bed, still carrying the famous
bag. The son knocked at the door. "Who are you?"
asked the father. "I am your son." "You lie. My son
died some three months ago." And the father per-
sisted in this belief and would not open the door. In


so                        ZEN KEYS
the end the child had to depart, and the poor father
lost forever his beloved son.
   This parable shows that when we have acknowledged
a certain thing to be the absolute truth and cling to
it, we can no longer accept the idea of opening the
door, even if truth itself is knocking at it. The Zen
practitioner must therefore strive to liberate himself
from his attachment to knowledge and to open the
door of his being in order that truth might enter. His
Master must also help him in these efforts. Zen Master
Lin Chi once said: "If you meet the Buddha, kill the
Buddha. If you meet the Patriarch, kill the Patriarch."
For the one who only has devotion, this declaration
is terrible; it confuses him completely. But its effect
depends on the mentality and capacity of the one who
hears. 1 If the man is strong, he truly will have the
capacity to liberate himself from all authority, whatever
it might be, and to accomplish in himself ultimate truth.
Truth is reality itself and not concepts. If we cling to a
certain number of concepts and consider them as being
reality, we lose reality. This is why it is necessary to
..kill" the concepts of reality in order that the reality
itself can be realized and reveal itself. To kill the
 Buddha is without doubt the only way to see the
 Buddha. The concept that one has formed of the
 Buddha impedes one from seeing the Buddha himself.
    1 "My friends of the Dharma Way, if you wish to acquire
 a correct view of reality, do not allow yourself to be de-
 ceived by anyone. When you meet someone, either going
 out or returning, you must kill him. If you meet the Buddha,
 kill the Buddha. If you meet the Patriarch, kill the Patriarch.
 If you meet the Saint, kill the Saint. This is the only way
 by which you might be liberated, free and independent."-
 Conversations of Lin Chi.


~·co   and Wash the Bowl"
To RETUfu~ HOME, to see into one's ovvn nature, is the
end aimed at by the practitioner. But how is one to
see into one's own nature? It is necessary to bring light
to one's existence, to live life, to render present and
permanent the awareness of being. Put in another way,
it is necessruy that one sees the cyprus in the courtyard.
If one does not see the presence of the cyprus in his
own garden, how can one see into his own nature?
   The Zen Master who has obtained Awakening is
a man with eyes open to living reality; it is he who,
after years lost in the world of concepts, has decided
to come to see the cyprus in the courtyard and his
own nature. Hence, he crumot allow his disciple to con-
tinue to wander in the world of concepts and thus lose
his own life, lose Awakening. This is why the Master
feels compassion each time his disciple is content to
pose questions on principles of Buddhism, on the Dhar-
makaya, on the Tathata, etc. "This man," he thinks,
"still wishes to engage in the search for reality through
concepts." And he does his best to tear his student
from the world of ideas and to put him in the world
of living reality. Look at the cyprus in the courtyard!
Look at the cyprus in the courtyard!
    One day a monk asked Master Chao-Chou to speak
to him about Zen. Chao-Chou asked: "Have you fin-
ished your breakfast?" "Yes, Master, I have eaten my
breakfast." "Then go and wash the bowl."
   "Go and wash the bowl." This is also, "Go and live


                        ZEN KEYS
with Zen." Instead of giving the questioner explanations
about Zen, the Master opened the door and invited the
man to enter directly into the world of the reality of
Zen. "Go and wash the bowl." These words contain no
secret meaning to explore and explain; it is a very
simple, direct, and clear declaration. There is no enigma
here, nor is this a symbol, eitl1er. It refers to a very
concrete fact.
The Good Reply
BunnmsT TERMS, such as tathata (reality in itself),
svabhava (own nature), dharmakaya (the body of ul-
timate reality), nirvana (extinction), etc., suggest con-
cepts that have nothing to do with living reality. Zen
Buddhism does not consider abstractions and symbols as
being important. What is important is reality itself,
Awakening, Awareness of Being. It can be understood
why questions that have been asked about the tathata,
Buddha, and dharmakaya have been turned inside out
by many Zen Masters. Let us take the case of a question
that has been put many times by students of Zen to
their Masters: "What is the Buddha?" Here are some
of the answers given:
   "The Buddha? He is in the sanctuary."
   "He is made of clay and covered with gold."
   "Don't talk nonsense."
   "The danger comes from your mouth."
   "We are surrounded by mountains."


             THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                  53
   "Look at this man who exposes his breast and
      walks with bare feet."
   These replies embarrass us perhaps. But the man
who has lived in Awareness of Being can open the
way to Awakening by one of these replies, and the
man lost in forgetfulness can be awakened by the same
reply. He who was busy wandering in the world of
abstractions can sink back into the heart of reality be-
cause of such a reply.
       *
The Kung-an and Its Function
THERE ARE, IT      rs SAID, nearly 1,700 declarations or
short conversations between Zen Masters and their dis-
ciples which serve as kung-an. 2 One understands a
kung-an as a sort of meditation theme, although again
it is not exactly a theme. Kung-an, a Chinese word,
means "official document," or a "juridicial document,"'
or "a document of official value." Sometimes one
uses, instead of kung-an, the words co tac ( kou tso),
or thoai dau (hua t'ou), which mean respectively "clas-
sical formats" and "the nub of a conversation." The
kung-an are used as training subjects in Zen; the prac-
titioner uses kung-an for meditation until his mind comes
to Awakening. It can be said arbitrarily that the
kung-an is like a mathematical problem that the stu-
dent must resolve by furnishing a reply. However, a
big difference exists between the kung-an and the math-
   2 In Japanesc it is called a koan; in Vietnamese, cong-an.


54                      ZEN KEYS
ematical problem-the solution of the mathematical
problem is included in the problem itself, while the
response to the kung-an lies in the life of the practi-
tioner.
   Put in another way, the kung-an is a useful instrument
in the work of Awakening, like a pick is a useful instru-
ment in working on the ground. What is got from
working on the ground depends on the man who works
on the ground and not on the pick. The kung-an is
not an enigma to resolve; this is why one cannot truly
say that it is the theme or subject of meditation. Be-
ing neither a theme nor a subject, the kung-an is only
a skillful means that helps the practitioner to reach his
goal.
   Kung-an were in vogue during the T'ang Dynasty.
Each Zen practitioner had a kung-an to work on. But
before this period, Zen Masters did not need kung-an.
The kung-an is, therefore, not something absolutely in-
dispensable to the practice of Zen. It is, more or less,
a skillful means created by Zen Masters in order to
help people who work under their direction. But the
kung-an can also become a great obstacle to Awaken-
ing if the practitioner thinks that truth is hidden in the
kung-an and that one can interpret it in conceptual
terms.
   Zen Master Hakuin (a Japanese monk of the Rinzai
sect) used to lift his hand and ask his disciples, "What
is the sound of one hand?" That is a kung-an. One
reflects. One wants to know what is the sound emitted
by one hand. Is there a profound significance hid-
den in this question? If there is not, why has Ha-
kuin asked the question? And if there is one, how
must it be got out? In fact, like a train that always
 sees the rail in front of it and rushes forward, our in-
 tellect always establishes logical principles in advance
 of itself and engages in the search for tmth. Now,


             THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                55
here, the rails are suddenly cut-taken up. Habit still
tries to establish imaginary rails in order that the train
of the intellect can rush forward as before. But watch
out! To go forward here is to fall into the abyss!
   "What is the sound of one hand?" Such a ques-
tion is the ax that cuts the rails in front of the train
-it destroys the habit of conceptualization in us. And
if the fruit is ripe, that is to say, if our spirit is
well-prepared, this blow of the ax will be able to lib-
erate us from the ties that have bound us for so many
years to the world where we "live as though dead,"
and bring us back to the heart of living reality. But if
we are not ready to receive it, we shall continue our
vain pilgrimage in the world of concepts. The ques-
tion is there in front of us, "What is the sound of one
hand?" We speculate as much as we can, we imag-
ine this famous "sound of one hand" in a thousand dif-
ferent ways, and what we find we present to the Mas-
ter with the hope of replying to his ideal But the
Master always says "No!" Arriving then at an impasse,
we are on the point of going mad, of losing our mind
because of this accursed kung-an. And it is exactly at
this moment of terrible crisis that the return to ourself
begins. Then "the sound of one hand" can become a
sun which dazzles our whole being.
   Hsiang-Yen was a disciple of Master Po Chang. He
was intelligent, but on the death of his Master he had
not yet obtained Awakening. He joined Master Wei-
Shan and worked under his direction. Wei-Shan asked
him one day, "Speak to me about birth and death. What
were your face and your eyes when you were not yet
born?'' Hsiang-Yen, having vainly tried to give a reply,
retired to his room, reflected day and night, reread
the texts he had studied, searched through the notes
he had made during the time of Po Chang, but was
unable to find a reply. When he presented himself to


                       ZEN KEYS
Wei-Shan, the latter said to him, "I do not want to
know what knowledge you have acquired; I only want
to learn what is your spiritual vision. Well then, tell
me something." Hsiang-Yen replied, "I do not know
what to say, Master. Please teach me something." But
Wei-Shan replied, "What use will it be to you if I
should tell you my own view?"
   Hsiang-Yen felt desperate, be thought that his Mas-
ter did not whole-heartedly want to help him. He
burned all the books he possessed and went off to a
remote part. He said to himself, "What is the good
of subjecting myself to so much trouble to study Bud-
dhism? It is not necessary to be a man well-versed in
doctrine. I want to live the life of a simple monk."
One day, as be was in the process of preparing the
ground to sow some beans, his fork dislodged a pebble
which struck against a bamboo stem and went "crack."
This sound "crack" brought about Awakening in him.
What Wei-Shan called "your face and your eyes before
your birth" suddenly became dazzling in his mind. He
had attained Awakening. Wei-Shan refused to intro-
duce Hsiang-Yen into the world of the intellect. He
wanted Hsiang-Yen to return to his true nature. And,
in fact, the possibility of Awakening only came to
Hsiang-Yen when he abandoned the enterprises of the
intellect. The kung-an, in this case, had done its work
well. In an effective way, it put the practitioner back
on the road of spiritual experience, and created a crisis
aimed at releasing Awakening.


        *
 The Significance of the Kung-an
WE HAVE DISCUSSED the function of the kung-an rather
than its signiflcance. But a kung-an, to be effective,
must at least signify something for the person to whom
it is given. When the Master proposes a kung-an for
his disciple it is necessary he be certain that this kung-an
is suitable to the disciple. Put in another way, the
kung-an must be a "skillful means."
    The kung-an cannot be any random word enclosing
 a contradiction designed to derail the practitioner in
 his search for truth by way of speculation. For this rea-
son, when he receives a kung-an, the practitioner is
tempted to discover some significance in it. This desire
 to decipher the kung-an always takes him off into the
labyrinth of philosophical reflection.
    It is first necessary to recognize that a kung-an only
has significance when it is addressed to a determined
person or to a determined group. Outside of this per-
son, or this group, the kung-an no longer has signifi-
cance. This is the principle of skillful means. Each
kung-an is applied to a particular case. If a kung-an
is used for more than one person, it is only because
those people resemble each other in their ,mentality
and psychological conditions. The significance of a
kung-an, therefore, only exists for the person concerned
and not for others.
    To have significance, a kung-an must have signif-
icance fo1· someone. This significance cannot be ex-
pressed in concepts or reduced to concepts. If one at-


sB                      ZEN KEYS
tributes the significance to concepts and ideas hidden
in the kung-an, then the kung-an does not indeed
possess any of this sort of significance. The significance
of the kung-an is the effect produced by the kung-an
itself on the mind of the one who receives it. If a
kung-an is not adapted to the one for whom it is des-
tined, it no longer has significance, even if it should
come from the mouth of a Zen Master.
    A monk walking through a market heard a butcher
say to his customer, "'This meat is of prime quality."
And the mind of the monk was enlightened, he ob-
tained Awakening. Undoubtedly the butcher is not a
Zen Master and what he said was not meant to help
the monk, but by chance, this declaration about the
quality of the meat struck the mind, already ripe, of
the monk and produced a great effect. Only the one
newly enlightened saw the significance and effect of
the kung-an, while the butcher, who was its author,
was totally unaware of what had happened.
    The Master must know the mentality of his disciple
well in order to be able to propose an appropriate
l."Uilg-an. Every Master meets success, but he also
knows failure, and he fails each time he proposes an
inappropriate kung-an.
    When a former kung-an-that is to say a kung-an
already proposed to another person-is recounted to us,
it can sometimes happen that we reach enlightenment
ourselves; all that is necessary is that the kung-an is
suitable to us and our mind is ripe.
    If the kung-an does not produce any effect on us, it
can be for two reasons: the first is that the kung-an
is not destined for us; the second is that we are not
yet ready to receive it. In either case, it is necessary to
 allow the kung-an to act and not to make efforts at
deduction and reasoning in order to find in it a con-
 ceptual significance. The kung-an only has significance


             THE CYPRUS TIN THE COURTYARD               59
for the one who is in the "circle of circtnnstances.'~
If we are outside this circle, it can have no meaning
for us at present. Perhaps one day we shall be within
the circle; that is to say, we shall find ourselves in ex-
actly the same condition as the one to whom the
              •
kung-an is presently addressed. But while waiting we
are still outside the circle. What we must do in this
case is to sow this kung-an in the soil of our spiritual
life and water it like a plant with the water of our
Awareness of Being. One day it will offer to us the
:Hower of Awakening.
Chao-Chou's "Nor
A MONK ASKED CHAo-CHou, "Does a dog have the
nature of Awakening?" "No," said the Master. Another
time, another monk asked him, "Does a dog have the
Awakening nature?" Chao-Chou replied: "Yes."
   Why two contradictory replies to the same question?
Because of the difference of the mentality of the two
questioners. The answers "yes" and "no" must here be
considered above all as skillful means, aiming at pro-
ducing appropriate effects on the mind of the practi-
tioners. Each reply does not claim to be an objective
butb. On the conceptual level, objective truth is on
the side of the word "yes" because in Mahayana Bud-
dhist circles it is said that every being has the Awaken-
ing nature. But in the non-conceptual world of living
truth the word "yes" is no longer a concept that is op-
posed to the concept "no." The words "yes" and "no"


6o                       ZEN KEYS
act here on the practitioner in a different way: this is
why their "significance" can only be received subjec-
tively by the mind of the practitioner concerned.
   The "no" of Chao-Chou is employed by a number
of Masters as a kung-an for their students. Let us listen,
for example, to Master Wu Mens in his work Wu Men
Kuan:
      In order to come to Zen it is necessary to go
   through the gates of the patriarchs. To attain
   Awakening it is necessary to get to the bottom of
   the mind. If you cannot pass through the gates
   of the patriarchs, if you cannot get to the bottom
   of your mind, you will remain forever ghosts cling-
   ing to plants and grass. But what is the gate of the
   patriarchs? This single word "no" is indeed the
   gate for the whole school of Zen. The one who
   can pass through this gate will be able not only
   to meet Chao-Chou, but even to walk hand-in-
   hand with all the other patriarchs. He will see
   things with the same eyes, hear things with the
   same ears. Is that not a great joy? Is there among
   you someone who wishes to pass through this
   gate? If there is someone, I invite him to pick
   up the doubt mass of his body, with its 360 bones
   and its 84,000 pores, and go in search of this "no"
   day and night, without a second's respite. Do not
   understand this "no" as Nothingness; do not take
   it to be a concept of non-being, as the opposite
   of being. It is necessary to swallow it as you would
   swallow a ball of red-hot iron that you cannot bring
   up. It is necessary to rip out all the knowledge
   stored up in the course of long previous years; one
   must ripen slowly. One day inner and outer will
   be found to be one and you will wake up. As a
   dumb person who dreams, you will keep what you
   3 A Chinese monk, born at Hangchow, who died in   1.260.


              THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                 61
   have obtained to yourself, without being able to
   communicate it to anyone.             Awakening will
   make the ve1y earth and sky tremble. It will be
   as if you have in your hands the precious sword
   of Kan-u. 4 When you meet the Buddha, kill
   the Buddha; when you meet the Patriarch, kill
   the Patriarch. You will come to absolute freedom
   at the very edge of the precipice of life and death,
    and you will walk in the six Realms 0 and in the
   four species, 6 all the while remaining in Samadhi.T
       How are we to reach this state? There is only
   one way: mobilize the energy of your whole being
   and pick up this "no" without being interrupted
   for a single moment. Awakening will come, like
   the wick of the lamp which is lit at the very mo-
   ment of contact with the flame. Listen:
   Buddha-nature of the dog,
   Is the official decree, is the concrete theme;
   But if you meddle with concepts of being and
                                          . not-being,
   You will lose your life.
   This poem of Wu Men has become a great kung-an
itself. What does Wu Men mean when he says,
"     . Pick up the doubt mass of [your] body, with its
360 bones and its 84,000 pores, and go in search of
this 'no' day and night, without a second's respite?"
It is so simple! He says that we must bring light to our
existence. We must not allow it to be swallowed up by
   4 A hero of the Chu Dynasty in China.
   5 In ascending scale these are the realms of hell, hungry
ghosts, beasts, fighting demons, human beings, and devas.
   6 The four modes of rebirth are through the womb,
through eggs hatched outside the body, through moisture,
an<l through metamorphosis.
   7 Ecstasy, the state of perfect control of Awareness of
Being.


6.2                      ZEN KEYS
the shadows; we must not remain plunged in uncon-
sciousness and forgetfulness; we must not live as though
dead. We must be alive at each moment, at each
ksana-the 360 bones and 84,000 pores must be awake,
like lights of candles. In the light of these candles the
problem is presented and the face of "no" is revealed.
This is true life and not the play of the intellect, the
play of words pronounced by the lips; this is a ball of
red-hot iron to swallow-the problem of life and death.
As life is something other than concepts, it is not neces-
sary to have truck with concepts. "Do not understand
'no' as Nothingness, do not take it as a concept of non-
being as opposed to being," because "if you meddle
with concepts of being and non-being you lose your
life.'' We will lose our lives if we leave living reality to
engage ourselves in the world of conceptual phantoms.
We shall then only be specters devoid of flesh and
bones, those attributes of living reality.
Entering the Circle
MASTER HuANG       Po has said about the "no" of Chao-
Chou:
       All those who consider themselves to be knights
    must try this kung-an. Stay with this "no" twenty-
    four hours a day, whether you are sitting, stand-
    ing or lying down, and even when you are dressing
    yourselves, eating, drinking or going to the toilet.
    Your mind must be continually concentrating all
    its energies on this "no.'' The flower of the mind


              THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD              63
   will bloom one day and you will see the great
   Way of Liberation open in front of you. Then you
   will no longer be deceived by this old monk and
   his kung-an.
   What Huang Po says does not differ from what Wu
Men said. Huang Po thoroughly endorses the impor-
tance of the function of the kung-an as a skillful
means when he speaks of the "deception of this old
monk" Chao-Chou, the author of the kung-an himself.
   Let us look again at the example of the cyprus in
the courtyard given by Chao-Chou to his disciple. The
cyprus in the courtyaxd is a cyprus that belongs only
to two people, Chao-Chou and his disciple. The one
points to the cyprus in the courtyard and says to the
other, "Look at the cyprus in the courtyard." Let us
suppose that there is a circle enclosing Chao-Chou, his
disciple, and the cyprus. We, ourselves, are outside the
circle. Chao-Chou points out the cyprus to his disciple,
not to us. ¥/e are not concerned, but only spectators,
or, if you prefer, observers. We do not know what really
passes between Chao-Chou, his disciple, and the cyprus.
And the question will really only arise for us when we
have our own cyprus.
   But what does this mean, "our own cyprus"? This
cyprus, which is in the circle, will only become ours
when we have entered into the circle ourselves; when
we have accepted the kung-an as our own, when we
no longer simply wish to study the kung-an of others!
   A 1..-ung-an is only a kung-an when it is ours. The
kung-<ms of others are not kung-ans. Thus, the cyprus
of the disciple of Chao-Chou is not my cyprus. I must
make the cyprus mine. Once it becomes mine, it is no
louger his. Put in another way, there is no relation be-
tween 111 !f cyprus and his cyprus, they are two different
<.:ypruscs.


                        ZEN KEYS
   The first step to take is to reject the attitude of an
 observer. Thanks to Chao-Chou's pointing," look at the
cyprus with your own eyes. Chao-Chou is seated there
before you and the cyprus is in the courtyard within
sight. You are face to face with Chao-Chou. You are
face to face with the cyprus. Do you see the cyprus?
If you see it, the kung-an is a success.
   Whether it is a cyprus, a lemon tree, or a willow is
of no importance. It can be a cloud, a river, or even
this hand that I put on the table. If you see it, the
kung-an is a success.
   Sometimes Zen Masters, instead of creating a new
kung-an, use a former kung-an. This does not mean to
say that they allow their disciples to play the role of
observers, using their intellect to examine the kung-ans
of others. Zen Masters want the former kung-ans to be
renewed and the disciples to take them as their own.
A monk asked Dien Ngu Giac Hoang, a Vietnamese
Zen Master of the thirteenth century, "What is meant
by the unprecedented matter of advancement?" Refer-
ring to an ancient picture, Dien Ngu replied, "It is to
carry the sun and the moon on the end of a stick." The
monk replied, "What is the use of an old kung-an?"
Dien Ngu smiled, "Each time that it is restated,
it becomes new."
   If one does not see the cyprus, it is because one has
not been able to make the cyprus into a new cyprus
for oneself-the living cyprus of reality-and that one
is content to go in search of the picture of the cyprus
of another.
   Mter the death of Chao-Chou, a monk came to learn
from one of his disciples. "Did he give any explanation
about this cyprus?" the monk asked. The disciple, who
had reached Awakening at the time, replied, "My
Master didn•t speak about a cyprus." Now, the kung-an
of the cyprus was very famous, everybody was speak-
ing about it in Zen circles. Why then did the disciple


             THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                65
want to deny a fact known by all? The monk insisted,
"Everybody knows that the Master himself has stated
the kung-an of the cyprus, Why deny it?" The disciple
of Chao-Chou parried energetically, "My Master never
stated such a kung-an; you had better stop slandering
him."
   It may be wondered why the disciple of Chao-Chou
acted thus. The reply is, however, simple: the cyprus
could not be "seen"; the monk stayed outside the
scene to "observe" the cyprus. He now looked for a
cyprus which was already dead. It would be much
better to "kill" the cyprus, to avoid all possible slander.
   The reply of Chao-Chou's disciple has become a new
kung-an: one can see another enormous cyprus rise up,
which becomes revitalized. But whether one does or
does not see this new cyprus, it has nothing to do with
Chao-Chou's cyprus.
The Mind Must Be Ripe
KUNG-ANS ARE NOT       study or research material. Each
kung-an must be considered as a finger pointing to
reality-the reality of your nature as well as the reality
of this world.
   This finger can only play its role of pointer if it is
pointed directly at you-put in another way, if you are
aware that this signal is addressed to you. You must be
very vigilant, very awake, and very alert because you
are face to face with the Master who observes you with
his piercing look; and the Master can at any moment


66                          ZEN KEYS
strike you with his stick, or let out a shattering cry.s
It is as though you were on the edge of a precipice and
you run the risk of going over at any moment. It is in
this state that your mind receives the shock of the
kung-an.
   Here is a kung-an that shows the intense and ur-
gent nature of the problem of "birth and death." One
day Hsiang-Yen said to his disciples, "Suppose that a
man should be suspended by his teeth from a very
high branch, his hands and feet not touching anything
or holding on to anything. Another man, standing at
the foot of the tree, asks him this question, "Why did
Bodhidbarma come to Chinar Suppose also that our
man has to reply to the question. H be speaks, and
therefore opens his mouth, he will inevitably fall and
crush himself on the earth below. What must he do?"
One of the disciples named Hu Tou presented himself
and said to Hsiang-Yen, "I beg you, Master, do not
take the case of the man who is clinging by his teeth.
Speak to us of the man who has already got down."
Then Hsiang-Yen burst out laughing.
    We can understand how disappointed he felt. Hav-
ing used an old kung-an, be had transformed it into
an entirely new kung-an, whose impact could have
been very great. That particular day Hu Tou and
his colleagues did not get the impact. But it is possible
that, three hundred years later, other people can come
to know enlightenment thanks to that very kung-an.
    Te-Shan came to Lung-t'an and stood near him right
up to midnight. Then Lung-t"an said to him, "It is late,
why don't you go home?" Te-Shan opened the door
 and left, but retraced his steps immediately, saying,
    8 To put their students into an alert state, Chinese Zen
 Masters sometimes use methods that seem bizarre. They let
 out piercing yells, strike with sticks, and even go so far as to
 throw their disciples into the river.


             THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                67
-rt is dark outside." Lung-t'an then lit a candle for him;
but as soon as Te-Shan took the candle Lung-t'an blew
it out. Darkness enveloped them suddenly and, just as
suddenly, Awakening came toTe-Shan. He bowed. The
sudden darkness helped Te-Shan to understand Lung-
fan's act
   Hsiang-Yen, as we said earlier, once thought that
Wei-Shan did not want to teach him the secret of Zen.
He left the monastery and retired to a distant place.
But Hsiang-Yen is not the only practitioner of Zen
who has thought thus. Many disciples put to their
Masters questions that they believe are important but
which the latter seem reluctant to answer. The disci-
ples complain, "I have been here for years already,
why do you treat me like a newcomer?" A monk asked
Master Lung-t'an, "What is reality in itself (tathata)?
What is supreme wisdom (prajna) ?" And Lung-t'an re-
plied, "I haven't the least reality in me; I do not possess
supreme wisdom." Another monk interrogated Chao-
Chou on the essence of Zen. In reply Chao-Chou asked
him if he had had his breakfast, and when the monk
replied affirmatively, he was sent to wash the bowl.
Another monk questioned Ma Tsu on the First Patri-
arch's intentions. Ma Tsu said, "I am very tired today,
I cannot tell you. Go and ask your older-brother-in-
the-dharma, Te-Shan." When the monk addressed Te-
Shan, the latter said, "Why don't you ask the Master?"
"I have already asked our Master. He said he was tired
and he told me to come to you." Te-Shan said, "I have
a headache. Go and ask our-brother-in-the-dharma,
Tche Hai." And when the monk addressed Tche Hai,
the latter replied, "I don't know."
   To refuse to answer a question, or to say something
that, in appearance, has nothing to do with the ques-
tion, does not signify that the Master refuses to help
his disciple. The Master seeks only to bar the disciple


68                      ZEN KEYS
from the world of speculation, which is foreign to
Awakening. In fact, the Master can always cite passages
from the scriptures and give detailed explanations con-
cerning the notions of tathata, nirvana, prajna, etc. If
he does not do it, it is because he knows that explana-
tions are not useful to the Awakening of his disciple.
   Certainly there are cases where such explanations
can help the disciple in his efforts to get rid of false
views about the doctrine and the methods. But the
Master refuses to give a reply or explanations that
could destroy the chances of Awakening and do harm
to the disciple. Wei-Shan once asked Po Chang: "Can
one speak without using the throat, lips, and tongue?"
And Po Chang replied, "Certainly, but if I do it I de-
stroy my whole posterity."
   Lung-t'an lived for years with his Master T'ien Huang
without receiving from him the secrets of Zen. One
day he could keep silent no longer. "Master," he said,
"I have been with you for years, but you have never
transmitted anything to me. I beg you to treat me with
more compassion." T'ien Huang said, "I have always
transmitted to you the secrets of Zen, from the day of
your entry into the monastery. When you bring me my
dinner, I thank you; when you bow down in front of
me, I also bow my head; why do you say then that I
have never transmitted to you the essence of Zen?"
   The Vietnamese Zen Master Tirili Khong, whose
disciple reproached him for not having taught him the
secret of Zen, said to this disciple, "We are living
together in this temple; when you light the fire, I wash
the rice, when you beg for alms, I hold the bowl for
you.        Never have I neglected you."
   To help practitioners cross the river and gain the
bank of Awakening, Zen Masters hold out to them the
pole of skillful means. The disciple must grab hold of
 the pole. But if his eyes remain shut and his mind


             THE CYPRUS IN THE COURTYARD                6g
blocked, the practitioner misses the pole. A monk came
to ask Zen Master Cam Thanh11, "What is Buddha?"
Cam Thanh said, "Everything." The monk continued,
"What is the mind of Buddha?" Cam Thanh replied,
"Nothing has been hidden." The monk said, "I don't
understand." Cam Thanh responded, "You missed!"
   Each time that a pole is held out to us, we either
miss it or grab it. There is no third alternative. Hesita-
tion is also a failure. Hesitation shows that we are not
yet ripe for the test. And when we fail we must not
regret it, but strive anew. We must go back to our daily
work of carrying water, cooking, and cultivating the
earth with greater awareness of being.
   At the time when Tri Bao 1 0 had not yet reached
enlightenment, a monk asked him, "Where did you
come from when you were born, and where will you go
to when you die?'' Tri Baa thought about it. The monk
smiled, "In the length of the thought the cloud has
crossed a thousand miles." If you are not ripe, all efforts
will be in vain.
   9 A Vietnamese Zen monk of the Vo Ngon Thong Sect of
the ninth century.
   10 A Vietnamese Zen monk of the Vo Ngon Thong Sect
of the twelfth century.




        IV
   *     *
 MOUNTAINS ARE
 MOUNTAINS AND
RIVERS ARE RIVERS




  The Mind Seal
  WE SHALL SAY that the Mind Seal is the continuous
 reality of Awakening. Indeed, one cannot "transmit" the
 Mind Seal because it is not transmissible. The Master
 does not transmit his Awakening to the disciple; he
 does not even create Awakening in the disciple. He
 only helps him to realize this Awakening already latent
 within him. The expression to "transmit the Mind Seal"
 is therefore essentially a symbolic picture. The Mind
 Seal, as reality in itself (tathata) and Awakening na-
 tw·e ( Buddhata) , expresses the natw:e of Awakening.
According to Mahayana Buddhism, all living beings
possess the Awakening nature. As a consequence, the
Mind Seal is latent in each person and does not need
to be transmitted to him. Master Vinitaruci, founder of
the Vietnamese Zen sect that carries his name, spoke
thus to his disciple Phap Hien, "The Mind Seal of the
Buddhas is a reality. It is perfect like the All; nothing
can be added to it, nothing can exist outside of it; one
does not get it, one does not lose it; it is neither perma-
nent nor impermanent; it is neither created nor de-
stroyed; it is neither similar nor different. It is as a skill-
ful means that it is thus named."
   "It is as a skillful means that it is thus named. . . ."
Here one sees again the characteristic method of Bud-
dhism. Nirvana, prajna, and tathata are only words or
concepts; being words and concepts, they are not really
nirvana, prajna, and tathata. This is also true of the
reality of Awakening, which Zen calls the Mind Seal.
It is only a concept that one must use as a ski11ful


74                       ZEN KEYS
means, it must not become an obstacle. To combat the
idea that the Mind Seal is a thing that can be trans-
mitted or obtained from others, Master Vo Ngon Thonl
left this message for his disciple Cam Thanh before
dying:
At the four cardinal points
It is noised abroad
That our founding patriarch lived in India
And that he had transmitted his Eye of the Dharma
                               treasure called "Thien":
A Hower, five petals,
Perpetual seeds . . •
Secret words, mystical symbols,
And thousands of other similar things
Are considered to belong to the Mind Sect of
                               immaculate nature.
 Indeed, where is India? India is here itself.
 Sun and moon are the sun and moon of our time;
 Mountains and rivers are mountains and rivers of our
                                time;
 To meddle with something, is to be attached to it;
 And one slanders even the Buddha and the Patriarchs.
 An error drags in its wake a thousand errors.
 Examine things closely,
 In order not to deceive your postedty.
 Don't question me further:
 I have nothing to say, I have said nothing.
     "I have said nothing": such is the conclusion of
 Master Vo Ngon Thong after having said something.
  One sees clearly the "letting go" mind of Buddhism.
 To say something and to say it in such a way that
 people do not become attached to it is the meaning
 of the term "Vo N gon Thong" (communion without
     1 Founder of the Zen sect Vo Ngon Thong in Vicbwm,
  living in the ninth century.


               MOUNTAINS .AllE MOUNTAINS               75
words), which is precisely the name of this Zen Master.
 He means that there is really no transmission to speak
about, no "Seal" transmitted from generation to genera-
tion; one should not wait for Awakening from some-
one other than oneself, even though this other might
be the Master in person. He rejects the affirmation of
the idea of transmission; but he is also afraid that the
disciples will come to the negation of the idea of trans-
mission. In consequence, he states, "an error drags in
its wake a thousand errors," and, "I have said nothing."
   To receive the Mind Seal is to see clearly into one's
own nature-the Mind Seal (or true nature) as the
tathata or Buddhata is one of the great themes of the
Mahayanist school. If the Zen Masters often refuse
questions on this subject, it is not because Zen is op-
posed to it but because they wish to prevent their disci-
ples from wasting their time in speculation. In reality,
the idea "true nature," of tathata and Buddhata, is
very close to the thought and practice of Zen. The idea
of true nature, for example, can become an obstacle for
the practitioner, but true nature as reality is the very
aim of Zen.
True Mind and False Mind
HuANG Po, in speaking of the reality of true nature
(what he called "the mind of unity and thusness"),
said:
      Buddhas and living beings participate in the
   same pure and unique mind. There is no separa-
   tion conceming this mind. Since time immemodal


                         ZEN KEYS
   this mind has never been created or destroyed; it
   is neither green nor yellow; it has neither form
   nor aspect; it is neither being nor non-being; it
   is neither old nor new, neither short nor long,
   neither big nor small. It transcends all the intel-
   lectual categories, all words and expressions, all
   signs and marks, all comparisons and discrimina-
   tions. It is what it is; if one hies to conceive it,
   one loses it. Unlimited like space, it has no bound-
    aries and cannot be measured. This Mind is unity
    and thusness, it is Buddha.
   The statements of Huang Po are clear: one must
allow the mind to reveal itself; it is lost if one tries to
conceptualize it. This means that in order to realize it
one must take a road other than that of concepts. The
only way to realize this Mind of Unity and Thusness,
which is also called True Mind is to return .to oneself
and to see into one's hue nature.
    True Mind is the radiant nature of Being, while
False Mind is only the faculty of conceiving and dis-
criminating. If one realizes True Mind, reality of Being
is revealed in its completeness; it is the enlightened life
of Zen. The world built of concepts is different from
living reality. The world in which birth and death,
good and bad, being and non-being are opposed, exists
only for those who do not live as Awakened. But the
vicissitudes of this world no longer affect the "'awak-
ened" man because he has already come to the world
of reality in which there is no discrimination between
birth and death, between good and bad, between being
and non-being.
    In the work The Awakening of Faith in the
Mahayana (Mahayana Sraddhotpada), one reads, in
connection with the world of reality without discrimina-
tion:


                MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS                 77
      All phenomena of being, since time immemorial,
   are independent of concepts and words; concepts·
   and words cannot transform them nor separate
   them from their true nature.
   This Mahayanist work uses the expression "wu-nien,•
which is translated as "non-conceptual." Non-conceptual
wisdom is wisdom that is not based on the concepts of
the False Mind-it is also called non-discriminative wis-
dom (nirvikalpajnana).
 Reality in Itself
TRUE NATURE, or True Mind, is not what one would
call an ontological entity of the idealistic kind. It fs
reality itself. The word "Mind" is sometimes called
"Nature"; True Mind and True Nattn·e are two differ-
ent names for the same reality. From the standpoint
of knowledge, one uses the word "Wisdom," and some-
times the word "Mind.'~ When one is talking about
reality in itself, the distinction between the subject and
object of knowledge no longer exists. This is the reason
why the expressions "True Nature" and "True Mind,.
sometimes refer to reality in itself, sometimes to non-
discliminative Wisdom which reflects this reality in
itself. Such an understanding of reality in itself is de-
scdhed in Zen as the act of seeing into one's own nature.
   Zen thought is the crystallization of the thought of
all Mahayana Buddhist schools. Its notion of Tathagata
Dhymw is derived from the Lankavatara. The Zen no-


                        ZEN KEYS
tion of True Mind, radiant and miraculous, comes from
the Suramgama. Its notion of the merits of DhyatUJ
comes from the Mahavaipulyapurnabuddha. Its notion
of the universe as a harmonious whole comes from
Avatamsaka. Its notion of emptiness is derived from
the Prajnaparamita. The Mind of Zen is entirely free;
the synthesis of all these currents of Buddhist thought
is accomplished in Zen in quite a natural manner, just
as plants absorb air and light.
   True Mind is not born at the moment of Awakening,
because it is neither created nor destroyed. Awakening
only reveals it. This is also true of nirvana and Bud-
dhata. The Mahaparinirvana Sutra says:
      The foundation and the cause of Nirvana, this
   is the nature of Awakening-the Buddhata. The
   Buddhata does not produce Nirvana; this is why I
   say the Nirvana-without-cause (that is to say, non-
   created) .      The nature of Awakening among
   living beings is the same: although living beings
   manifest themselves and are transformed, they are
   always grounded in the nature of Awakening.•.•
   Consequently, the practitioner must not await an
Awakening that might come from outside, a transmis-
sion or a gift of Wisdom. Wisdom cannot be obtained,
the Mind cannot b·ansmit itself. The Heart Sutra (the
M ahaprajnaparamita H ridya Sutra) assures us: "There
is no obtaining because there is no object to obtain."
Master Nguyen Hoc, a Vietnamese monk of the
twelfth century, said to his disciples: "Do not wait for
another person to transmit Awakening."
   All that is created and destroyed, all that can be
obtained and lost, is conditioned: a thing is produced
when the necessary conditions to its production come
together; a thing is lost when these same conditions


               MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS                    79
disperse. Reality in itself is the base of everything;
not being ephemeral, it is not conditioned by produc-
 tion and destruction, by gains and loss. Master Nguyen
Hoc says: "True Nature is non-nature; it has nothing
to do with production and destruction." However, to
say that it exists in a world in itself independent of the
world of phenomena would be to commit the gravest
of errors regarding the problem of True Mind. To say,
for example, "A world exists which is real in itself' al-
ready classifies this world in the category of being, in
opposition to the category of non-being. Being or non-
being, as we have said, belong to the conceptual
world. If the world of True Mind transcends the world
of concepts, why classify it in the world of concepts?
It then ceases to be the world of True Mind, it be-
comes a concept-vaguer and more impoverished per-
haps than any other concept. As a consequence, words
cannot describe True Mind, concepts cannot express
True Mind. And if one speaks of True Mind, one sim-
ply does so through "skillful means," as Vinitaruci says.
To say a thing is easy; most people allow themselves
to be taken in by the thing said. It is better to say noth-
ing; it is better to "understand without words."
    As for the world of phenomena, we are inclined to
believe that it is illusory, separate from reality. And
we think that only by ridding ourselves of it shall we
be able to reach the world of Tme Mind. That, too,
is an error. This world of birth and death, this world of
lemon b·ees and maple trees, is the world of reality in
itself. There is no reality that exists outside of the lemon
trees and the maples. The sea is either calm or stormy.
If one wants a calm sea one cannot get it by suppressing
the stormy sea. One must wait for this same sea to
become calm. The world of reality is that of lemon
trees and maple trees, of rivers and mountains. If one


So                           ZEN KEYS
sees it, it is there in its total and complete reality. If
one does not know it by seeing it, it is but a world of
ghosts, a world of concepts, of birth, and death.
The Lamp and Lampshade
THE Ts'Ao-T'UNG ZEN SECT, 2 dwing meditation, ap-
plies the following five principles:
    1.    It is sufficient to sit in meditation, without hav-
             ing a subject of meditation.
    .z. To sit in meditation and Awakening are not
             two different things.
    3·    One must not wait for Awakening.
    4·    There is no Awakening to obtain.
    5·    Mind and Body must become one.
    These principles, in reality, do not conb·adict the
method based on the use of the kung-an in the Lin
 Chi sect. Better still, the Ts'ao-t'ung principles can help
the practitioners of the Lin Chi sect not to discriminate
between the end and the means. Indeed, many prac-
 titioners are inclined to think that sitting in meditation
is a means for obtaining Awakening, which would thus
be an end. However, a line of demarcation between
 the end and the means cannot truly be established.
 When we turn from forgetfulness to awareness of be-
 ing, this state is already true Awakening. This is why
     2 Soto Zen in Japan.


               MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS
the Ts'ao-t'ung sect has said, ..To sit in meditation is to
be Buddha." "When one buly sits in meditation, one
finds oneself Awakened; and Awakening is Buddha him-
self.
    In the state of dispersion and forgetfulness we lose
ourselves, we lose our life. To sit in meditation is to re-
store and to recuperate oneself. Imagine that the dif-
ferent parts of our physical body are dispersed here and
there in space. Very well! To sit in meditation is to re-
assemble them all at once; it is to regain the complete-
ness of our being, to bring ourself to life, to become
Buddha.
    According to this principle, sitting in meditation is a
 great joy. But why must one put oneself in this sitting
 position? It is because this position (lotus or half
 lotus) makes it easier to control the breathing, to con-
 centrate, and to return to the state of Awareness of
 Being. Nevertheless, Zen does not only apply itself to
 the sitting position. Zen is applied to all positions,
 walking, eating, talking, working. . . "What is a Bud-
 dha?" "A Buddha is one who lives twenty-four hours
 a day in Zen, all the while living his daily life."
    A monk asked Hsiang Lin, "Why did the First Patri-
 arch come to China?" Hsiang Lin replied, ..It ruins the
 health to go on sitting for too long." This same question
 has been given diverse replies by several Masters. Mas-
 ter Kieou Feng replied, for example, "The fur of a
 tortoise weighs nine kilograms." Master Tkong Chan
 said, "Wait until the river Tong flows in the opposite
 direction and I will tell you." These two replies produce
 particular effects in particular minds. But the reply
  given by Hsiang Lin, "It ruins your health to go on
 sitting for too long" is simple and can be applied to
 nearly all cases. To sit with only the intention of find-
  ing the meaning of a kung-an is not truly to sit in Zen;


82                       ZEN KEYS
it is to spend one's time and one's life vainly. If one
sits in meditation it is not in order to reflect on a
kung-an, but in order to light the lamp of one's true
being; the meaning of the kung-an will be revealed
quite naturally in this light which becomes more and
more brilliant. But if this lamp is not lit, one will re-
main sitting in the shadows all of his life; one will never
see into his own nature. One will ruin his health if he
goes on sitting too long!
   The kung-an should not be taken as a snbject for
research in meditation, because one does not sit in
meditation in order to reflect. The kung-an is not life;
it is sitting in meditation that is life. The kung-an sim-
ply plays a role of testing, witnessing and maintaining
vigilance. It could be said that the kung-an is the lamp-
shade, while Zen is the lamp itself.
       *
A Non-Conceptual Experience
THE OBJECT OF SITTING in meditation is not to think,
reflect, or lose oneself in the realm of concepts and
discriminations; neither is it remaining immobile like a
stone or a tree hunk. How must these two extremes
of conceptualization and inertia be avoided? The solu-
tion is to remain in the midst of the experience of real-
ity, under the lamp of awareness of being. Direct
 experience and awareness of this direct experience con-
 stitute the whole problem. The words seem to be
complicated, but the thing is so simple!
    When you have some tea, you have direct experi-


                 MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS
 ence of the tea. This expedence can be had with the
 full and enlightened participation of your awareness, or
 without this participation. But the expelience you thus
 have of the tea is a direct and living expedence of real-
 ity. It is not a concept. It is only when you think about
 it, when you remember it, or better still, when you
 make a distinction between it and other former experi-
 ences that this experience becomes a concept. To be
 more precise, the concept of this experience is not this
 experience itself; as a consequence, we cannot say that
 the experience has become a concept.
    At the moment of the experience you and the taste
 of tea are one. You are not different from the tea. The
 tea is you, you are the tea. There is not the ddnker of
 tea, there is not the tea that is drunk, because there is
no distinction between the subject and the object in
the real expedence. When one starts to distinguish sub-
 ject. and object, the expedence disappears. Only con-
 cepts remain. The world of Zen is the world of pure
 experience without concepts. To inb·oduce a kung-an
 as a subject of meditation is certainly not to practice
Zen. This is the reason why the Ts'ao-t'ung sect says,
"It is sufficient to sit in meditation without having the
need for a subject of meditation."
    The world of direct experience of Zen is, therefore,
that of life and of awareness, not that of inert matter.
On a conceptual level, if we can make the distinction
between the one who tastes the tea and the tea that
is tasted, which are two elements basic to the experi-
ence of the tea (a single expedence without subject
or object), we can also make the distinction between
the practitioner of Zen and the reality lived by him in
his experience. This spidtual expedence is produced
when the practitioner and his reality (the closest part
of this reality being the psycho-physiological current
of his own existence) enter into direct communion. The


                         ZEN KEYS
nature of this experience, like that of the tea, is also
indivisible. However, it must be noted that the notion
of "Wlity" is only another concept. All concepts, in-
cluding those of "urJty" and of "duality," are foreign
to experience which can be described as non-
conceptual. It is life, and not a representation or
description of life; it is reality in itself that transcends
all descriptions, all ideas. It is tathata. The world of
Zen is the world of tathata itself.
 The Principle of Non-Duality
DaGEN,    a Japanese Master, said, "All phenomena is
mind; mind is all. It contains rivers, mountains, moon
and sun." In Zen experience there is no longer an object
of knowledge. The Treatise of the Great Virtue of Wis-
dom (the Mahaprafnaparamita Sastra) of Nagarjuna
says:
      All phenomena are to be understood in two cate-
   gories: mind and matter. On the conceptual level
   we distinguish mind and matter, but on the level
   of Awakening, all is mind. Object and Mind are
   both marvelous. Mind is Matter, Matter is Mind.
   Matter does not exist outside of Mind; Mind does
   not exist outside of Matter. The one is in the other.
   This is what is called the "non-duality of Mind
   and Matter!'
   All discrimination between subject and object re-
 moves us from Zen and its principle of non-duality.


                   MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS                      ss
 Look at the following :flgure. Total reality is given as a
 circle divided into two parts A and B.
    It seems possible for us to make a distinction between
Mind and Matter, Subject and Object. To do so in real-
ity is arti::Scial, if not impossible. First of all, let us notice
that Mind, considered as the subject of knowledge, can
be at the same time the object of knowledge. If we
turn this subject of knowledge back on itself, it becomes
at the same time object of knowledge. And, when Mind
becomes its own object of knowledge, is that which is
grasped Mind itself, or only a projection of a collection
of pictures of the Mind? Put in another way, are psy-
chological phenomena, considered as objects of study
and analysis, the Mind itself, or only images and con-
cepts used to represent the Mind? This question could
be put in the following way: can the Mind enter into
itself, or is it only capable of seeing its image, of mov-
ing around on the periphery of itself?
   Another question: does the Mind exist independently
of its object? Or put in another way: can the subject
of knowledge exist without the eXistence of its object?
   The doctrine of Vijnanavada, one of the Mahayanist
Buddhist doctrines, says that the word knowledge
 (vijnana) indicates at the same time the subject and
the object of knowledge. The subject and object of


 86                      ZEN XEYS
knowledge cannot exist independently of each other.
As a consequence A does not exist if B does not exist,
and vice versa.
    For reasons already given, the division of reality into
Mind and Matter, subject and object, must be con-
sidered as superficial, conventional, and also as "skillful
means" to be used with very great care. When reality
is revealed in the light of awareness of being, Mind is
revealed as True Mind; Matter as True Matter. The
Treatise of the Great Virtue of Wisdom says: "Mind
is Matter, Matter is Mind, Matter does not exist out-
side of Mind, Mind does not exist outside of Matter.•
    Consider figure A:        .
                   v
                           FIG. A
    Reality ( ab) is symbolized by the circle. This is the
dharmakaya, the tathata, the nirvana (the perfection,
 the totality, the unconditioned), that transcend all men-
tal categodes and all concepts. Above the dotted line
 ( y) two parts are distinguished which themselves are
separated by the dotted line (x), distinguishing the
subject of knowledge (a") and the object of knowledge
 (b').
    The knowledge of (a'-b') is in this case conceptual
 knowledge; it is based on the dualistic notion of real-
 ity, existence separated into Mind and Matter. This


                MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS
form of knowledge has vikalpa as its nature, that is to
say, discrimination-imagination, and cannot introduce
us directly into reality.
    Let us now look at figure B:
                          FIG. B
    Here the two dotted lines (y) and (x) are removed.
    The subject (a') and the object (b') return to them-
selves, in perfect, non-discriminative and non-imagina-
 tive reality. This is the world of Awakening of Zen.
    Then let us look at figure C:
                             X
                   y
                          FIG. C
    In this figure we see the two dotted lines ( y) and
 (x) reappear. Arising from non-discriminative and non-
imaginative reality (a-b) is expressed in the subject
(a') and in the object (b'). Figure C is similar to


88                       ZEN KEYS
figure A, but in this case there are, in addition, two
small arrows which indicate the movement of remanifes-
tation.
   The awakened man Jives in the world of things Jike
everyone else. When he sees a rose be knows that it is
a rose, Jike everyone else. But the difference is that be
is neither conditioned nor imprisoned by concepts. Con-
cepts now become marvelous "skillful means" in his
possession. The awakened man looks, listens, and dis-
tinguishes things, all the while being perfectly aware
of the presence (a-b) that is the perfect and non-
discriminative nature of everything. He sees things
perfectly in their interdependent relational nature.
 Interdependent Relation
 Tms   EXPRESSION "the interdependent relational nature"
 of things is tied directly to the concept of non-identity
 just discussed. To see things in their interdependent
 relational nature is to perceive their nature of non-
 identity. Put another way, it is to recognize their exist-
 ence, even when they are not present. Let us look, for
 example, at a table. It exists at this very moment. We
 recognize its existence only when the interdependent
 conditions, upon which its presence is grounded, con-
 verge; but we cannot recognize its existence before
 these conditions are brought together. Nevertheless,
 the table existed before being there; it existed formerly
 through the play of interdependent factors such as the
 wood, the saw, the nails, the carpenter, and the multi-


               MOUNTAINS ARE MOUNTAINS                   Bg
tude of other elements directly or indirectly connected
with its existence. H one can see the existence of the
:able through these interdependent conditions, one can
ilio see it in unlimited space and infinite time. 'This
;?rofound vision of reality delivers man from the fear
:hat results from concepts such as "existence/non-
3.xistence," "permanent/impermanent," "1/Not-I," etc.
fhe awakened man is free, serene, and happy. He has
10 fear of the vicissitudes of life. He is master of him-
:elf. Nothing is added at the moment of Awakening.
:;'igure C represents the state of Awakening, while
igure A represents the state of sleep. The two figures
U"e identical. A Zen Master said, "Before practicing
~en, rivers were rivers and mountains were mountains.
Nhen I practiced Zen I saw that rivers were no longer
 ivers and mountains no longer mountains. Now I see
 hat rivers are again rivers and mountains are moun-
 ains." The figures A, B, and C give support to this
 estimony. Once Awakening is reached, the practitioner
 s master of himself; while living in the world of con-
 litioned things, he lives his life of liberty. Concerning
 he relation between matter and mind, phenomena and
 rue nature, knowledge and action, Cuu Chi, a Viet-
 tamese monk of the Vo Ngon Thong sect who lived in
 he eleventh century, said:
      All methods aiming at the realization of Awak-
    ening have their origin in your true nature; the
   true nature of everything is in your mind. Mind
   and Matter are one, and not two different things.
    Conditioning, slavery and error do not really exist;
   true and false, sins and merits, are only illusory
   images. So is the law of cause and effect. Your
   activity must not be based on conceptual discrim-
   ination; otherwise your activity will not be com-
   pletely free. The free man sees all, but nothing
   is seen by him; he perceives things, but is not


go                     ZEN KEYS
  taken in by the concepts of things. Why? Because
  when he looks at things he sees their true nature;
  when he perceives things, he penetrates their inter-
  dependent relational nature. Thus, while living in
  the world he possesses the secret of the production
  and manifestation of phenomena. It is the only way
  to arrive at Awakening. There is no other. Once
  free of errors caused by concepts, you can live
  in peace and freedom in the world of karma; by
  using skillful means, realize your calling of Awak-
   ening in this conditioned world, without even
   thinking that the world is conditioned or uncon-
   ditioned.


      v
FOOTPRINTS OF
  EMPTINESS




        *
 The Birth of Zen Buddhism
 IT WAS TOWARD THE END of the eighth century that the
 term "Zen school" was used for the :first time. Before
 this the terms Leng Chia Tsung, Tung Ch'an Tsung,
 Ta Ma Tsung, Ho So Tsung, Nieu T'ou Tsung, etc.
 were used-all these terms denoting the Buddhist tradi-
 tions that considered the practice of meditation in the
 sitting position the basis of Buddhism.
    In the middle of the fifth century, the Indian monk
 Gunabhadra ( 394-468) translated the Lankavatara
 Sutra. His disciples and their friends organized study
 sessions of the text and formed a school called Leng-
 chia Tsung (Lankavatara school). The Lankavatara is
 generally considered as a basic text for Zen Buddhism.
    In the seventh century, a Chinese monk named Tao
 Shin founded a special monastery for meditation on
Mount Tung Shan at Ho Nan. One of his disciples,
Hung Jen, continued his work and taught the practice
of Zen to certain disciples. Among these disciples of
Hung Jen were such celebrated monks as Shen-hsiu,
Hui-Neng, and Fa Jung. Later Shen-hsiu was to teach
in the north of the country and Hui-Neng in the south.
Fa Jung remained at the monastery Yeo Ts'i in the
mountain of Niu-T'ou at Nan King, and founded the
Niu-T'ou sect. Zen started to break up with the Tsing
T'ou (Amidaism). According to most authorities, Fa
Jung ( 594-647) was a disciple of Tao Shin and the
founder of the Niu-T'ou sect. In reality, Fa Jung was
neither the disciple of Tao Shin nor the founder of the


94                       ZEN KEYS
sect in question. The tradition founded by Tao Shin
and Hung Jen is called the Tung Shan sect. Both taught
in their monastery situated in the mountain of Tung
Shan.
   Shen-hsiu founded the Northern school (Pei Tsung).
It was in this school that the use of the kung-an was
started.
   Hui-Neng founded the Southern school (Nan
Tsung), but in effect it was his disciple Shen Hui ( 668-
760) who was the true founder. Most of the historical
documents of Chinese Zen Buddhism arise from this
school. It is also the Southern school which developed
the notion of sudden enlightenment, while the North-
em school embraced the doctrine of gradual enlight-
enment.
   As the grandeur and prestige of the Southern school
was assured, Shen Hui felt it necessary to establish a
history of the tradition of Zen Buddhism. Using avail-
 able facts, he retraced the history of Indian Buddhism,
with its twenty-eight patriarchs, from Mahakasyapa the
first, to Bodhidharma the twenty-eighth. Bodhidharma
is the First Patriarch of the Zen school of China. After
him the Mind Seal was transmitted to Hui-Ko, then to
 Seng ts'ang, Tao Shin, Hung Jen, and Hui-Neng. Ac-
 cording to Shen Hui, Hui-Neng is the Sixth Patriarch
 of the school. Shen Hui himself is considered the legiti-
 mate successor of the Si.."'{th Patriarch.
    The historical documents of Zen furnished by the
 Southern school aimed, ce1tainly, at consolidating the
 prestige of this school, so they do not reflect the entire
 truth and, above all, the truth concerning the Northern
 school. Shen Hui attacked the Northern school, while
 the latter was in vogue, because the idea of gradual
 enlightenment preached by this school was taken up
 enthusiastically by the aristocracy and the courtiers.
 Even at this time, the expression "Zen school" was not


                FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                95
used, but rather the traditional appellation "Bodhi-
dharma school" (Ta Ma Tsung).
    At the same time, in Niu-fou, the monk Huian Sou
 ( 668-752) was exploring the doctrine of non-reference
to words. This doctrine, as well as the use of the
kung-an started by the Northern school, was to affect
generally the evolution of the Zen sects of the following
generations.
    When the Northern school started to decline, the
Southern school knew a rapid development. After Shen
Hui the great monks like Hsi Ch'ien ( 700-790), Tao
Yi ( 707-786) and Fa Kin ( 714-792) appeared, and the
five famous schools of Zen-Lin Chi, Ts'ao Tung, Yun
Men, Kuei Yang and Fa Yen-were founded. These
schools were introduced in Japan and Vietnam, par-
ticularly the Lin Chi and Ts'ao Tung schools.
    After Shen Hui the tradition was called the Ho Tso
school, Ho Tso being the place where Shen Hui lived.
The expression "Zen school" (Ch'an Tsung) appeared
at the time of Po Chang ( 739-808), the author of the
famous monastic rules. Called Po Chang Ts'ing Kuei,
these were the rules by which the Zen tradition separ-
ated itself completely from the monastedes of the
Vinaya School.
    Zen certainly derives from Buddhism, but a form of
 Buddhism that belongs to a geographical zone in-
:B.uenced by the Chinese culture. The Chinese Zen tree,
transplanted in Japan, in Vietnam, and in Korea, has
grown well and greatly. Zen Buddhism, in each of these
countries, differs with certain nuances from that prac-
ticed in China. One can, however, easily recognize its
identity.


       *
Zen and the West
A GREAT NUMBER OF SCHOLARS and monks have wanted
to transplant Zen in Europe and America. Have these
efforts proved successful? It remains to be seen.
   From the standpoint of knowledge, certain scholars,
including Professor Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, have con-
tributed a great deal toward arousing the interest of
Westerners in Zen Buddhism. Zen has influenced the
thinking of theologians like Paul Tillich, and philoso-
phers like Erich Fromm and Carl Jung. But Zen does
not yet exist in the West as a living tradition. Many
monks are teaching the practice of Zen there, but this
practice still remains Oriental; foreign to Western cul-
ture. The fact is that Zen has not yet been able to find
roots in this soil. Cultural, economic, and psychological
conditions are different in the West. One cannot be-·
come a practitioner of Zen by imitating the way of
eating, sitting, or dressing of the Chinese and Japanese
practitioners. Zen is life; Zen does not imitate. If Zen
one day becomes a reality in the West, it will acquire a
Western form, considerably different from Oriental Zen.


Zen and China
THERE ARE IMPORTANT DIFFERENCES        between the In-
dian and Chinese mentality; it is these differences that
have given birth in China to the form of Buddhism
called Zen. The Chinese are very practical people.
Confucianism, Taoism and Buddhism reflect this char-
acter. The declaration made by Bodhidharma on his
arrival in China has become the foundation of the Zen
Buddhist tradition, because this declaration corre-
sponds so well to the pragmatic nature of the Chinese.
The Indian world of ideas and images, such as is re-
vealed in the holy scriptures Avatamsaka, Saddharma,
Pundarika, Vimalakirtinirdesa, etc., have no equivalent
in China. Perhaps this tendency toward dreaming and
speculation was the cause of the decline of Indian Bud-
dhism at the beginning of the eighth century. Bud-
dhism, which is founded on human experience and not
on speculation, cannot exist without returning to spiri-
tual experience-its base. Naturally the Chinese are
capable of studying and understanding the fantastic
world of ideas and images in Indian Mahayanist Bud-
dhism. They have, indeed, translated, commented upon,
and systematized all the literary sources of Indian
Buddhism. But their practical nature attracts them to
the experiential base of Buddhism. It is this that has
pmmitted Buddhism to become :Hrmly established in
Chinese soil. Though Zen is a Chinese form of Bud-
dhism, it reflects entirely the spirit and splendor of
Indian Buddhism, from its inception to its full develop-


g8                        ZEN KEYS
ment. For this reason one can say that Zen brings us
the authentic spirit of Buddhism.
   The experiential and pragmatic nature of Zen, its
attitude vis-a-vis concepts and words, are witness to this
authenticity. The personage of Buddha, in the Avatam-
saka, Shingon, and T'ien T' ai sects, is represented under
all the extremely allegorical forms. In Zen, Buddha is
represented as a man of flesh and bones, among
men. 1
   Although different from Indian Buddhism from the
standpoint of form and practice, in the end Zen seems
to be more authentic than many other Buddhist schools.
In particular, Zen emphasizes the necessity of practice
aiming at enlightemnent which is the very foundation
of Buddhism.
   As we already know, the principle of non-identity
 (Not-I), is used only as a means to open the way of
Buddhism-it is not a dogma. The principle of non-
identity is applied to the world of living beings as to the
world of inanimate things. Non-identity signifies ab-
   1 Master Lin Chi said, "If it is said that Buddha is im-
motial, why did he have to die between the two Sala trees
in the forest of Kusinara? Where is he now? It is necessary
to know that Buddha, just like us, must obey the law of birth
and death. You say that Buddha possesses miraculous powers.
But the Asulas and Brahma possess these miraculous powers
also. Are they Buddhas? The miraculous powers of Buddha
are those which allow him to be free of forms when he
enters into the world of forms, free of sounds when he enters
the world of sound, free of smells when he enters the world
of smell, free of tastes when he enters the world of taste,
free of perceptions when he enters the world of perception,
free of thoughts when he enters the world of thought.
To acquire the six miraculous powers is to acquire the nature
of emptiness of the six domains of the object of knowledge.
 Although he is there, in his body of five skandas, he walks
 on the earth in his miraculous powers."


               FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                 99
sence of permanent identity. Non-identity is non-
permanence itself. Everything is constantly changing.
Therefore, nothing can be fixed in its identity. Every-
thing is subject to non-identity.
The Notion of Emptiness
THE NOTION OF emptiness in Buddhism is derived from
the notion of non-identity. Emptiness ( sunyata) signi-
£es the hollow space at the interior of a thing, the ab-
sence of identity of this thing, and not the absence of
the thing itself. The image is that of a balloon. The
balloon is empty; in the same way, everything is devoid
of absolute identity.
   Let us examine the following passage from the Sam-
yutta Nikaya;
   • Sir, why is the world called empty?
   • It is because in the world identities and things
        possessing this identity do not exist.
   • What are the things which do not have iden-
        tity?
   • Eye, image and sight do not possess identity,
        nor that which belongs to identity. In the same
        way, ear, nose, tongue, body, thoughts, their
        object and their lmowledge, do not possess
        identity either, nor that which belongs to
        identity.
   All phenomena (physical, psychological, and physi-
ological) are devoid of permanent identity. To be


100                      ZEN KEYS
empty is not to be non-existent; it is to be deprived of
this permanent identity. To illush·ate this point, Nagar-
juna, in his M ahaprafnaparamita-Sastra (second cen-
tury) said: "It is due to this emptiness that all
phenomena exist." There is nothing ambiguous in this
declaration, if things are considered in the light of non-
identity and non-permanence. It is impossible that
things should be permanent and identical to them-
selves in an absolute manner; nothing changing, noth-
ing being created, nothing being transformed, nothing
disappearing. Existence would be impossible if things
were not empty of absolute identity. To affirm that
there is an absolute identity is to deny the existence of
things, while the proclamation of the principle of non-
identity is an affirmation of these very things. This is
why the expression "the identity of things" is itself a
contradiction. Things are only possible while they are
 devoid of identity. This can be expressed in these
formulae:
 Non-permanence        non-identity     things exist.
 Permanence            identity          nothing can exist.
    The notion of emptiness, such as Buddhism under-
stands it, is therefore the affirmation of the existence of
 things and not its negation. Our desire for a world in
which things are permanent and indestructible is an
 unrealizable and contradictory desire.


      *
Complementary Notions
THE HrNAYANA sCHooLs OF BUDDHISM (such as the Sar-
vastivada, the Sautrantika and the Theravada) have
for this reason established philosophical systems that
aim at demonstrating that the absolute identity of
things does not exist, while the things ( dharmas) that
are devoid of this identity exist.
   However, in order to avoid confusion between iden-
tity and existence, these schools teach that things exist
only in the present moment. These schools, in particular
the Sarvastivada, engage in the study and analysis of
physical, physiological, and psychological phenomena
and also of phenomena that cannot be classified in any
of these three categories. The works devoted to these
studies and analyses are numerous. The fear of noth-
ingness, inspired by the doctrine of non-identity, has
given rise to the need to confirm the existence of things.
But in proclaiming that things exist only in the present
moment, some difficulties have been created. How can
one explain the notions of karma, rebirth, and enlight-
enment, for example, if one cannot establish the rela-
tion between things that exist in the present moment
and things that exist in the past and in the future?
   The Hinayana doctrines have developed other ideas
to complete their doctrine. In the Sarvastivada school,
for exmnple, it is taught that from the standpoint of the
noumena, things exist in the past, in the present, and
in the future; but from the standpoint of phenomena,
they exist only in the present moment. The formula


10.2                     ZEN KEYS
"identity does not exist, things exist'' is not completed
by the formula "the true nature of things exists in a
continuous way through the past, the present and the
future ...
    The Theravada school uses the notion of obtainment
to establish the relation of cause and effect between
things. The Sautrantika school uses the notion of seeds
 ( bija), perfumation ( vasana), and lineage ( gotra) . The
Sarvastivada school teaches a pluralist-realist doctrine,
a s01t of pan-realism, and devotes all its time to the
study and analysis of ideas about the dhannas.
 Anti-Scholastic Reactions
REACTING AGAINST THIS      scholastic and dogmatic tend-
ency, new schools and doctrines grew up. In the mid-
dle of the fourth century B.C., the Mahasanghika school
again posed the problem of knowledge. It emphasizes
the importance of purifying the mind in order to realize
enlightenment. Showing the futility of study and analy-
 sis of dhannas, this school encourages direct spilitual
 experience.
    The Pudgalavada school, originating at the beginning
 of the third century B.c., proclaims that the I (identity)
 exists, and that the point of view of the Sthavira schools
 concerning the notion of Not-! (non-identity) is con-
 trary to the spirit of Buddhism. Although condemned
 as heretical by many others, the Pudgalavada has been
 able to demonstrate the errors committed within the
  scholastic and dogmatic tendencies of tradition. It is


                 FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS               103
 known that in those times, the Pudgalavadin monks
 were very numerous. There were about sixty thousand,
 while the total number of monks existing in India was
 only two hundred :fifty thousand.
    The second century B.c. saw the appearance of the
 first Prajnaparamita Sutra text and the rise of the doc-
 trine of emptiness, in an effort aimed at regaining the
 original spirit of Buddhism. The Prajnaparamita texts,
 as well as other Mahayanistic texts, such as the Sa-
dharmapundarika, the Lankavatara, the M ahaparinir-
vana, and the Avatamsaka, continued to appear in the
following century. The explorations made by the Maha,.
sanghika schools and by the Pudgalavada contributed
much to the appearance of these Mahayanist schools.
    In order to see the characteristics of Zen better, we
must examine the essential traits of the Sunyatavada
school and the Vijnanavada school. The Sunyatavada
school, known later as Madhyamika, is founded on the
Prajnaparamita scriptures, while the Vijnanavada school
is based on the Sandhinirmocana, Lankavatara, and
other texts. The texts mentioned are used in the Zen
tradition. It can be said that Zen Buddhism reflects the
essence of all these Mahayanist scriptures in a harmoni-
ous way.
        *
Return to the Source
THE POINT OF DEPARTURE of the Prajnaparamita
thought is the notion of emptiness. In the beginning,
as we know already, the word emptiness signified the


                        ZEN KEYS
absence of permanent identity. When the Sarvastivada
school declared that from the phenomenal point of view
things do not exist as permanent identities, but that the
true nature of things exists from the ontological stand-
point, it can be seen that this permanent identity of
things is now disguised as an ontological entity. The
Prajnaparamita explains: "Things do not have their own
nature; the ontological entity of things does not exist."
The Prajnaparamita, through this declaration, tends to
bdng us back to the source of Buddhism.
   The notions of impermanence, of non-identity, of in-
terdependent relation, and emptiness are means aimed
at revealing the errors of knowledge rather than at
giving a description of the objects of knowledge. These
notions must be considered as methods and not as
knowledge. We must correct the habit we have of see-
ing things while having principles of conduct as our
basis. According to the Vajracchedika-prajnaparamita,
this problem is the most important problem of all.
Buddha said to Subhuti, who asked him what was the
method to correct understanding:
      Subhuti, the great bodhisattvas must correct
   their understanding in the following way. It is nec-
   essary for them to think: while living beings exist,
   whether they are oviparous, viviparous, exudative,
   or metamorphosics, whether they possess a form or
   not, whether they are gifted with perception or
   not, I must bring them all to Nirvana. But, al-
   though these innumerable living beings must be
   brought to Nirvana, in reality no living being has
   to be so brought. Why is this? It is very simple.
   If a bodhisattva maintains in his mind the con-
   cepts of self, others, of living beings, of person,
   then he is not a hue bodhisattva.
   Why are concepts the source of errors that must be
corrected? Because the concept is not reality. "To bdng


                FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                105
all living beings to Nirvana" is reality itself; but "to
bring," "living beings," "Nirvana," "the bringer," and
the "brought" are only concepts. And why is there
this great distance between reality and the concept?
There is no discrimination in reality in itself. But "real-
ity" in the world of concepts is full of discriminations:
subject/object, 1/Not-1, etc. This is not truly reality
but an erroneous image of reality. The origin of this
erroneous image is called discrimination or imagination
 ( vikalpa) in the Vijanavada school.
    This flower, for example, which is near the window,
is a true flower in its non-discriminated reality. Be-
cause we discriminate it is no longer revealed. In its
place stands an erroneous image of it. The word
"empty" which at first signified the absence of perma-
nent identity, now acquires another meaning: the image
created by the concept does not represent any reality, it
is imaginary.
The A Which Is Not A Is Truly A
IN THE V ajracchedika-prajnaparamita we find many ex-
pressions given in the form, "The A which is not A is
truly A." Let us take several examples: "Living beings,
I say that they are not living beings, this is why they
are truly living beings." "The Buddhist docbine, I say
is not the doctrine of Buddhism, this is why it is truly
the Buddhist doctrine." What does that signify? It is
quite simple. Reality is only reality when it is not
grasped conceptually. 'What we construct through our


106                      ZEN KEYS
concepts is not reality. It can also be said, "This flower,
which is not a concept, is truly a flower." Here again
is found the rejection of the principle of permanent
identity, and a tendency to see things by means of the
go-between of conceptualization. The practitioner of the
Way must enter into direct contact with reality, without
allowing concepts to separate him from this reality. Re-
 ality cannot be conceived, nor can it be described in
words. Reality is reality; it is thus. This is the signifi-
 cance of the word thusness ( tathata).
    The Prafnaparamita begins with this declaration:
there is no true nature, there is no permanent identity.
 Emptiness itself has become a concept, the opposite of
the concept "existence." Being a concept, emptiness can
no longer reflect reality. Emptiness has been offered as
 a means, one must not take it as a reality. It is the finger
pointing to the moon, it is not the moon itself.
    The Maha Ratnakuta says:
       Attachment to erroneous views is comparable to
    a sickness. All erroneous views can be cured; only
    attachment to the view of emptiness is incurable.
    Attachments to the view of being piled as high as
    a great mountain are much more preferable than
    attachment to non-being. 2
    For this reason true emptiness is identical to
 the tathata, which is non-discriminated and non-
 conceptualized reality. Many go too far in seeing in
 emptiness or the tathata the ontological basis of every-
 thing. The idea of an ontological entity, as we already
 know, is the notion of absolute identity in disguise,
 which is the very enemy of the Prajnaparamita. All
 that can be said is that emptiness or the tathata
    2 Kasyapa parlvarta of the Maharatnakuta Sutra.


                 FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                107
is non-conceptualized reality. All concepts about empti-
ness are enemies of emptiness, all concepts about the
tathata are enemies of the tathata. To arrive at the
reality of emptiness or the tathata will be to arrive at
the Great Wisdom. Let us read this dialogue in the
Astasahasrika-prajnaparamita:
   Subhuti: It is truly marvelous that the tathata can
       reveal the true nature of things when nothing
       can be said about this true nature of things!
       Have I understood you right, sir, when I say that
       we cannot say anything about things themselves?
   Buddha: It is true; one cannot speak about things.
   Sttbhuti: And things which transcend words, can
       they grow or diminish?
   Buddha: No, they cannot.
   Subhuti: If it is thus, the six practices of the para-
       mitaa cannot progress. How then can the Bo-
       dhisattva arrive at complete enlightenment. How
       can one realize complete enlightenment without
       perfecting the six paramitas?
   Buddha: Subhuti, nothing grows or diminishes in
       the nature of the six paramitas. The Bodhisattva
       who practices the paramita of wisdom, who de-
       velops the paramita of wisdom and who prac-
       tices the skillful means never thinks, for example,
       "this paramita of generosity is in the process of
       growing or decliuing." On the contrary, he thinks
       "the paramita of generosity is nothing other
       than words." When the Bodhisattva offers some-
       thing to someone he offers him his whole heart
   ll Tlw six practices which lead to absolute enlightenment
 nrc ~enerosity, discipline, patience, diligence, meditation,
 aml wisdom.


 108                     ZEN KEYS
      and all the roots of the good of this act as a gift
      of wisdom to all beings. This offering expresses
      the method of realization of total Wisdom. When
     he practices discipline, patience, diligence, medi-
     tation and wisdom he acts in the same way.
   Subhuti: And what is this complete enlightenment?
   Buddha: It is the tathata. The tathata does not
      grow and it does not decline either. If the mind
      of the Bodhisattva remains at peace in the ta-
     thata, the Bodhisattva is near to complete en-
     lightenment; he can never lose this enlighten-
     ment. Reality, which transcends words and
      concepts, does not contain the paramitas, or
     things, neither does it grow nor diminish. From
      which one knows that when the Bodhisattva re-
     mains in this mind, he becomes the man already
     near complete enlightenment.
Penetrating the Tathata
THE IDENTIFICATION of the tathata with emptiness is an
attempt to prevent people from conceptualizing empti-
ness. Similarly, the Mahaprafnaparamita-Sastra puts
forward the expression non-empty ( asunyata) . The non-
empty is another name for emptiness and for the ta-
thata. The non-empty is treated in the Mahayana
Sraddhotpada by Asvaghosa in a very appropriate way.
Mter confirming that the tathata of things cannot be
described by words or represented by concepts, Asva-


               FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                 109
ghosa states that a method exists by which to pene-
trate the tathata; it consists of "following skillfully."
According to Asvaghosa, this supposes abandoning the
dualistic tendency. When one speaks of something, one
does not distinguish the subject that speaks from the
object treated. When one sees something, one does not
distinguish the subject that sees from the thing seen.
When one is able to get rid of discrimination, one begins
to penetrate the world of tathata. "Following sldllfully,"
according to Asvaghosa, is to clear a path amid words
and concepts in order to arrive at reality.
   But words and concepts can be used without allow-
ing oneself to be taken in by them; in this case, words
and concepts become useful and even indispensable.
On the level of words and concepts, two forms of
the tathata can be distinguished-emptiness and non-
emptiness. It is because emptiness is not a concept, but
the emptiness of the tathata, that one calls it true empti-
ness; and it is because non-emptiness is not a concept
either that one calls it the true non-emptiness. All of
this is designed to combat the concept of emptiness
which is the true enemy of emptiness.
Subject and Object
DISCRIMINATION between subject and object (a dual-
istic tendency) is the cause of all error concerning both
knowledge and practice. The attitude of the Prajna-
paramila vis-:\-vis knowledge and method is expressed


110                      ZEN KEYS
very clearly in this passage from the Astasahasrika-
prafnaparamita, which can be looked upon as a true
Zen text:
  Subhuti: How must Bodhisattvas practice in order
     to be able to see clearly that things do not have
     their own nature?
  Buddha: Forms must be seen as devoid of the true
     nature of form; sensations must be seen as de-
     void of the true nature of sensation. It is the
     same concerning the other sense organs and their
     objects.
  Subhuti: If things are devoid of true nature, how
     can the Bodhisattva realize perfect wisdom?
  Buddha: It is non-realization which is in the proc-
     ess of realizing perfect wisdom.
  Subhuti: Why is this realization a non-realization?
  Buddha: Because one cannot conceive wisdom nor
     the Bodhisattva who practices wisdom, as one
     cannot conceive realization, the realizer, the
     methods of realization, nor the media of realiza-
     tion. The realization of wisdom is therefore a
     non-realization in which all speculation is with-
     out value.
  Subhuti: If it is thus, how can the beginner realize
     wisdom?
  Buddha: From the first moment of awareness, the
     Bodhisattva must meditate on the inaccessible
     nature, or non-obtainability [anupalambha], of
     things. While practicing the six paramitas the
     Bodhisattva must say to himself that he can ob-
     tain nothing.
  Subhuti: What is        obtaining? What is non-
     obtaining?


                FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS               111
   Buddha: Where object and subject still exist, ob-
     taining exists. 'Where the object and subject
     cease to exist, non-obtaining exists.
   Subhuti: What is the subject-object and what is
     the non-subject-object?
   Buddha: Where the distinction between eye and
     form, ear and sound, nose and smell, tongue and
     taste, body and sensation, act of thought and
     thought still exists; where the distinction be-
     tween the man who acquires enlightenment and
     the enlightenment which is acquired subsists,
     the subject-object exists. Where there is no
     longer a distinction between eye and form, ear
     and sound, nose and smell, tongue and taste,
     body and sensation, cogitation and thought;
     where there is no longer the man who acquires
     enlightenment and the enlightenment acquired,
     there there is no longer subject-object.
      *
The Three Gates of Liberation
THE Ts'Ao-T'UNG scHOOL, as we know, emphasizes the
importance of non-obtaining. This position reflects the
sphit of the Prajnaparamita. The principles of "medi-
tation without subject" and "practice and enlighten-
ment are one" certainly derive from the principle of
non-obt:.1ining. It must be recognized here that the doc-
trine of non-obtaining has as its origin the notion of
non-pursuit ( apranihita) in primitive Buddhism. The


11.2                     ZEN KEYS
Digha Nikaya, Lalita-Vistara, Abhidharma Kosa-Sastra,
Vibhasa and Visudhimagga texts, all speak of this in
the context of the "three gates of liberation."
   The three gates of liberation are emptiness (sun-
yata), no-trace ( animitta) and non-pursuit ( aprani-
hita), Emptiness is the absence of permanent identity
of things. N a-trace is the nature of non-conceptualiza-
tion of things. Non-pursuit is the attitude of someone
who does not feel the need to run after an object, the
need to realize it or obtain it. It is, for example, not
pursuing enlightenment as an object of knowledge. The
Sansla.it word apranihita signifies "putting nothing in
front of oneself." The Vibhasa, Abhidhm·ma Kosa-Sastra
and Visudhimagga texts have the tendency to interpret
non-pursuit as non-desire; since things are impermanent,
one must not run after them. For the same reason these
texts interpret no-b.·ace as the false value of facts pro-
vided by the sense organs.
   The three gates of liberation are therefore interpreted
by the majolity of Hinayanist texts from the moral point
of view rather than from the epistemological point of
view. In Mahayanist Buddhism in general, and Zen
Buddhism in particular, a close relationship can be
found between the three stages. Absence of an absolute
identity in each thing (emptiness) is manifested by the
non-conceptual (no-trace) knowledge in which a sub-
ject in quest of its object does not exist (non-pursuit).
In the true knowledge of reality the distinction be-
tween subject and object, obtaining and obtained, no
longer exists.
    But if non-pursuit signifies the cessation of the desire
vis-a-vis impermanent things, it could be said that in
this case the desire vis-a-vis liberation, or the desire
 for enlightenment, still exists, which is radically opposed
 to the idea of non-attaining in the Prajnaparmnita and


                   FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS           113
in Zen. Jacques Gemet, in the introduction to his trans-
lation of Conversations with Master Shen Hui,4 speaks
 of the sudden enlightenment of Zen as being a special
product of Chinese Zen Buddhism, which does not exist
in Indian Buddhism. In my opinion, this is not the case.
The notion of non-obtaining in the Prajnaparamita was
 the basis for the doctrine of sudden enlightenment. The
passages of the Prajnaparamita that we have cited prove
this.
         *
 The Eight Negations of N agarjuna
IN THE SECOND CENTURY A.D., Nagarjuna systema-
tized Pra;naparamita thought. He compiled the
Mahaprafnaparamita-Sastra, the Madhyamika Sastra
and the Dvadasanikaya Sastra. His disciple, Arya Deva,
compiled the Sata Sastra in the same line of thought.
Nagarjuna's three texts later became the foundation
of a Mahayanist school called Madhyamika in India
and San Lun in China. Candrakirki was the founder
of the Madhyamika and Ki Tsang that of San Lun.
   The method used by the M adhyamika consists of
demonstrating the absurdity and the uselessness of con-
cepts. It aims at showing the reality of emptiness, dealt
with by the Prajnaparamita. It is not a linguistic phi-
losophy, a simple play of words, or an intellectual ex-
en:isc. The aim of the Madhyamika is clear: to reduce
   ·l l'ublislwd i11 llanoi in 1949.


 114                     ZEN KEYS
all concepts to absurdity in order to open the door of
non-conceptual knowledge. It is not the intention of the
Madhyamika to propose a view of reality in order to
oppose it to other views of reality. AU views, according
to the Madhyamika, are erroneous, because the views
are not reality. The Madhyamika is, therefore, proposed
as a method and not as a doctline. This makes the
Madhyamika the legitimate heir to the Prajnaparamita
thought.
    In his Madhyamika Sastra, Nagarjuna proposes the
following eight negations:
                There is no- generation;
                There is no destluction;
                There is no continuation;
                There  is no interruption;
                There is no w1ity;
                There is no plurality;
                There is no arriving;
                There is no leaving.
   This is the negation of the eight fundamental con-
cepts through which reality is habitually considered.
Other concepts derived from it, such as those of cause,
effect, time, space, subject, object, etc., are also ana-
lyzed and finally rejected by Naga1iuna as simply prod-
ucts of discriminative knowledge. When speaking of
generation, for example, one also speaks of the object
which is generated; but if one goes in search of this
object, one does not find it. Generation is not possible
without an object that is generated. Nothing generates
itself, says Nagarjuna, because generation does not ex-
ist. To demonstrate this Nagarjuna poses this question:
before the effect E is produced as a function of the
cause C, does the effect E already exist within the
cause C?


                FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                115
       Dividing line
    between cause and             Dividing line between
          effect                     cause and effect
         Case 1:                         Case 2:
   E does not exist in C.         E already exists in C.
   If we reply (case 1) that the effect E does not
exist in the cause C, Nagarjuna demonstrates to us
that in this case generation is not possible. Indeed, if
there is no relation between C and E, if E does not
exist in C, it is impossible that E should arise from C.
A chick cannot be born of a table; a chick is born from
an egg. If we reply (case z) that E already exists in
cause C, N agarjuna demonstrates to us that, in this
case, E has no need of being generated since it exists
already. The relation between an egg and a chick is
not a relation of cause and effect; it is becoming and
not generation. The concept of generation is thus ren-
dered absurd. In the process of his analysis, the im-
permanent nature, the non-identity and also the empti-
ness of what we believe to be the object of generation
and of destruction can be seen.


       *
The Middle Way
ALL CONCEPTS ARE DESTROYED         in the same way by
N argarjuna, who takes all precautions necessary to
avoid replacing one concept by another. In the process
of analyzing the concept of generation, for example, the
concepts "'to become" and "non-production" are brought
forth. Both these concepts must also succumb to Nagar-
juna's dialectic. This dialectic aims at combating con-
cepts in such a way that the concepts that are diametri-
cally opposed to them cannot be used; for tllis reason it
is called "The Middle Way." The term "middle" does
not signify a synthesis between opposing concepts such
as "'being" and "non-being," "generation" and "'destruc-
tion"-it signifies the transcendence of all concepts.
   This dialectic is also expressed in the principle of
the two truths: absolute truth (para martha satya) and
relative truth ( samvritti satya). In its pme form, pre-
sented by an enlightened man, dialectic is absolute
truth. Seized by concepts, it becomes relative h·uth. To
render it absolute once more, it is necessa1y to take a
new step; and if it is still conceptualized, another step
must be taken in order to bring it back to its original
pure fom1.


                     FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS
                                  Non-Conceptual D~ription
Conceptual Description                 in a dialectic form
    (relative truth)                     (absolute truth)
Being                             Non-Being
Being and non-Being               Neither Being nor non-Being.
Being and non-Being-               Neither non-Being nor
  neither Being nor non-Being.       non non-Being.
Neither non-Being nor non          Neither "neither non-Being" nor
  non-Being.                         "nor non non-Being." etc.
      According to the principles of the "three gates of
  liberation," negation therefore has the role of breaking
  down concepts to the point where the practitioner comes
  to rid himself of all discrimination and penetrates undis-
  criminated reality. Dialectic aims at producing a trans-
  forming crisis and not at expounding a truth. In this
  close relationship between the language and attitude
  of Zen, the Prajnaparamita thought and the Madhya-
  mika thought can be clearly seen.         .
      Zen Masters do not use dialectic in the way that
  N agarjuna does, but their words, their acts, and their
  looks also have the function of combating concepts, of
  producing crises, and of creating conditions that arrive
  at releasing the vision of reality. If one were to spend
  his days in the Zen monastery in the study of the
  Prajnaparamita and the Madhyamika texts, much time
  would be wasted, and there would not be enough time
  left to practice Zen. But these texts are always there in
  the Zen monastery; they can be consulted at any time.


       *
The V ijnanavada School
THE VIJNANAVADA scHOOL, which beneRts considerably
from the researches of the Sarvastivada school and
inherits from it to some extent, also deals with the prob-
lem of the tathata, as did the Prajnaparamita thought,
but from the phenomenological view. The most funda-
mental texts of the Vijnanavada school are the San-
dhinirmocana Sutra, which appeared during the middle
of the second century, and the Lankavatara Sutra,
which appeared during the beginning of the third cen-
tw.y A.D. According to Daisetz Teitaro Suzuki, the Lan-
kavatara is not a true Vijnanavada text, but a Zen
text. The reason for this, he says, is that it is the only
text transmitted by Bodhidharma, the First Zen Patri-
arch, to his disciple Hui-Ko, and, further, the text em-
phasizes the importance of the inner spiritual experi-
ence of Buddha and of reaching enlightenment. But,
in fact, nearly all Buddhist texts speak about this spiri-
tual experience and about reaching enlightenment.
 It cannot be said that the Pra;naparamita texts are not
 basic Zen texts; on the contrary, the Vafracchedika
 and the H ridaya are the two most popular Prafnapara-
mita texts among Zen practitioners. The fact that Bo-
dhidharma transmitted to Hui-Ko the Lankavatara clad-
 Res only one thing for us: the Lankavatara text was the
favorite text of Bodhidharma.
    The Lankavatara can be considered as a basic text
 for Zen Buddhism, as Suzuki thought, but it is at the
 same time the basic text of the Vijnanavada school.


                 FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                119
 This demonstrates that there is a close relationship be-
 tween the Vijnanavada and Zen, just as there is between
 the Prajnaparamita and Zen.
 Classification of the Dharmas
   THE VIJNANAVADA classifies dharmas (things) into
   five groups:
   1.   The phenomena of knowledge ( citta), of
          which there are eight.
   z. The phenomena of states of consciousness
          ( citta sika), of which there are fifty-one.
   3·   Physical and physiological phenomena (rupa),
          of which there are eleven.
   4·   Relational phenomena ( citta viprayutasam-
          saka), of which there are twenty-four.
   5·   Unconditioned phenomena         (asankrta),    of
          which there are six.
   There are, then, in all one hundred dharmas. The
last category groups the dhamuzs under consideration
as unconditioned, and distinguishes: ( 1) unconditioned
space, i.e., that which is neither created nor desb:oyed
by conditions; (z) the unconditioned acquired by en-
lightenment; ( 3) the nature of the unconditioned,
which has nothing to do with enlightenment; ( 4) the
unconditioned that is freedom from all pleasure and all
pain; (5) the unconditioned that is the cessation of


120                     ZEN KEYS
all thought and of all sensation; (6) the unconditioned
of tathata.
   It should be noticed at this point that the tathata is
also considered as a dharma. If one calls "all that
which can be conceptualized" dharma, why can ta-
thata, which transcends all concepts, be considered as
a dhruma? The Vijnanavada replies: "The tathata and
all other dhrumas cannot be conceptualized. It is only
by convention or expediency that one uses these repre-
sentations."
   The Trimsika Vijnaptimatrata of Vasubandhu begins
with this declaration concerning these representations:
      It is because of the presupposed existence of
   permanent identities and of dharmas which possess
   this permanent identity that so many diverse repre-
   sentations are manifest. All these representations
    come from conscious-knowledge [vijnana].
       *
 Conscious Knowledge
Taus, THE RECOGNITION of one hundred dharmas di-
 vided into five groups is only an acceptance of the pre-
 supposition that dharmas exist. This acceptance serves
 as a means for the beginning of the exposition of the
 Vijnanavada doctrine. This already emphasizes the dif-
 ference between the methodology of Vijnanavada and
 that of the Sarvastivada. According to Vijnanavada, all
 sensation, perception, thought, or knowledge is mani-
 fested from the basis of reality, which is called alay-


                   FOOTPIUNTS OF EMPTINESS              121
avijnana. In its nonconceptualized nature, alayavif-
nana is tathata or "wisdom of the great and perfect
n1irror."
    There are in all eight kinds of conscious knowledge
 ( vijnanas) which are classified in three categories:
     1.  V ijnana of knowledge of objects ( vijnaptirvi-
            saya), which concems sight, touch, hearing,
            taste, and smell, and the manovijnana, which
            is the center of sensations, perceptions and
            thoughts.
    2.   Vijnana of the activity of thought ( manas),
            center of the discrimination I/Not-I and of
            reflections.
    3·   Vijnana of the base ( alaya), the base of the
            manifestation of all knowledge, subject and
            object.
    The Mahayana Sraddhotpada-Sastra says about the
    alaya:
        True Mind [ultimate reality] can be seen from
    two sides: the side of birth/death [phenomenal]
    and the side of true nature [tathata]. Phenomena
    come from the "tathata"; phenomena are neither
    the replica of "tathata" nor different from it:
    "Alaya" means the basis of conservation and mani-
    festation of all the dharmas; i.e., the "tathata."
    All the vijnanas, all sensations, perceptions, and cogi-
tations contain in themselves at the same time their
subject and their object of knowledge. When the eye
is opposite a flower, one can say that the eye and the
flower are dhannas which can exist separately; but
when "seeing" occw·s, the subject and object of the
seeing exist at the same time in the sensation. The eye
as object is not the object seen. The object of the seeing


 1.2.2                   ZEN KEYS
is found in the seeing itself, and cannot exist independ-
ently of the subject of the sensation.
    The above figure shows us that when sensation oc-
curs the first phase, which is contact between the physi-
ological phenomenon (eye) and the physical phenome-
non (flower), has already passed in order to arrive at
 the second phase, which is the sensation (seeing) . This
underlines another difference between the phenomeno-
logical style of the Vijnanavada and the Sarvastivada's
 tendency toward pluralistic realism. Does the image of
the flower in the sensation faithfully reflect the flower
in reality? This is a question. The relation between the
reality of the :Hower and the sensation which ruises
from it is another subject posed by the Vijnanavada.
     The first point reveals that the world of sensations
 and of concepts is only the world of Vijnana (conscious-
 knowledge). The object of vijnanas is only the object
 of knowledge. One can then wonder whether the physi-
 ological and physical conditions, according to which the
 vijnanas are produced, are truly existing. The Vijna-
 navada tells us they exist, as an object of alaya, and one
 can call them the "world of reality in itself." The role
of alaya is to maintain all the dharmas and to make
 them appear. Alaya is also defined as the totality of
 dharmas themselves. The word alaya implies to con-


                 FOOTPIUNTS OF EMPTINESS               123
serve and to maintain. Though considered as a vij-
 nana, alaya does not ftmction as do the Manovijnana
 or the Manas on the discdmination of subject and ob-
ject, I and Not-1.
    In the case of pure sensation, where the discrimina-
tion of subject/object does not exist, the ..world of real-
ity in itself" is revealed. This world of reality in itself
 is tathata, the true nature of alaya. If the vijnanas
are separated from the discrimination of subject/object,
they become wisdom (jnanas) and perfect revelation
of reality in itself.
       *
 Method of Vijnanavada
EACH VIJNANA       consists of three parts: subject (dar-
sanabhaga), object ( nimittabhaga) and bue nature
 ( svasamvittibhaga).
                      subject  I object
                          true nature
    Each sensation, perception and thought also possesses
these three parts. The notion of three parts shows that
the Vijnanavada plays heavily on the ontological prob-
lem. The part called "true nature" is considered as the
basis of reality, the essence of vijnana and the tathata.
The first two parts are only the manifestation of the
talhala. As each drop of water is salted, each dhanna


124                      ZEN KEYS
is produced on the basis of the tathata of reality. The
realization of reality does not come about by pinning
things down, but by seeing into their true nature.
   What is the method proposed by the Vijnanavada?
First of all the importance of the non-dualist way must
be recognized. Things depend upon each other in being
produced; they do not possess any true identity. This
is what is called the interdependent Mture (para-
tantra) of things. All lmowledge not based on the prin-
ciple of paratantra is wrong. It does not reflect reality.
Indeed, it carries with it this illusion-imagination which
is called vikalpa. Vikalpa cuts reality into separate
pieces, giving them each separate identities. Vikalpa
discriminates. If vikalpa is destroyed, knowledge be-
comes pure and able to reveal the tathata. Things will
then be presented in their thusness. They will reveal
their nature of nispanna (perfect reality) . Knowledge,
 being pure, is called wisdom ( jnana) .
    But in reality vikalpa, parantantra and nispanna are
 only states of knowledge. As knowledge is vikalpa, the
 object of lmowledge is also vikalpa. As lmowledge is
clarified by the paratantra, the object of knowledge is
revealed in its paratantra nature. As lmowledge becomes
 absolutely pure, the object of knowledge becomes nis-
panna. This once more indicates that the subject and
 object of knowledge are but one.
   Having dealt with these three natures ( tri-svabhavas)
 of things, the Vijnanavada then tells us that these three
 natures do not truly exist. Take, for example, the vi-
 kalpa nature (illusion-imagination) of things. This na-
 ture does not truly exist. It is only a kind of illusory
 veil, through which things are seen. It is the same for
 the paratantra and nispanna natures. As things do not
 have true identity they cannot possess any "nature."
   The Vijnanavada therefore establishes the principle
 of three non-natures ( trinisvabhavatas) to combat the
 principle of three natures which was first established


                 FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                 125
to guide people in the way of the purification of knowl-
edge. This method makes us think of the method of
Madhyamika which uses concepts in order to destroy
concepts. At the same time it shows us that the Vijnan-
avada is very closely connected to the method of Zen.
Absolute reality, according to Vijnanavada, cannot be
described by the three natures or by the three non-
natures, or by any other concept. This is because it is
tathata, because it is the absolute truth of the dharmas
( dha1'rnanam paramarthas), absolute truth that is only
revealed by enlightenment.
   Just like the Prajnaparamita and Zen, the Vijnan-
avada emphasizes the imp01tance of non-obtaining in
the process of purification of knowledge. Vasubandhu
says in his Trimsilca:
      As long as the vijnana does not wish to remain
   in peace in its non-dualistic nature, the roots of dis-
   crimination between subject and object are still
   there, indestructible.
      'When the practitioner places in front of himself
   something that he considers as the true natme of
   vijnana [vijnaptimatra-svabhava], he is still not
   in the heart of the true nature of vijnana, because
   he still distinguishes subject and object.
      When, faced with the object of knowledge, he
   does not consider it as an object of his own realiza-
   tion, the practitioner begins to live in peace in the
   true nature of vijnana, because he has rendered
   the dualistic discrimination immanent.
      This reality, which can neither be conceived nor
   obtained, is the b:anscendental wisdom.


Alaya as the Basis
THE TRUE NATURE of vijnana, of which Vasubandhu
speaks, is none other than the tathata, or "illuminating
nature of knowledge." In the state of enlightenment,
the five vijnanas of sensation become "the wisdom of
the miraculous powers"; the manovijnana becomes "the
wisdom of the marvelous inspection"; the manas be-
come "the wisdom of the non-discriminating nature,.;
and alaya becomes "the wisdom of the great and perfect
   .
mrrror."
   Zen Buddhism does not enter the realm of analysis
and discussion as does the Vijnanavada, but it brings
out its spirit in a profound way. The notion of alaya
can throw a great deal of light on the mechanism of
enlightenment in Zen. Alaya is the profound base of
life and the psyche while the manovijnana and the
manas are only reflecting elements, ideas, and concepts.
From the phenomenological point of view, alaya is the
basis of being and non-being. It conserves and main-
tains the energies and the essences that are manifested
in the dharmas. These energies and these essences are
called seeds (bija). The manas and the manovijnana


                 FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS               127
                           Alaya
                                    X
                             X
                          Seeds
 are manifested on the basis of alaya. The roots coming
from their en-ors are thrust into alaya and are called
anusaya. The practitioner of meditation on the para-
tantra (interdependent nature of things) brings about
changes at the heart of alaya and these changes trans-
form and neutralize the anusaya roots. Enlightenment
is the fruit of this transformation, called asrayaparavrtti.
According to Huian Tsang, the word signifies transfor-
mation ( paravrtti) and support ( asraya) . To transform
is not to desh·oy. The support is here paratantra. Using
the principle of paratantra as a basis, one transforms
the seeds and roots of ignorance into seeds and roots
of enlightenment. This transformation does not come
about only in the manas and manovijnana, it comes
about in the herut of alaya itself. When alaya is en-
lightened, the manas and the manovijnana are also en-
lightened.
   FlO\vers and grass, mountains and livers, are no
longer given as vikalpa images to the enlightened man,
but are given in the reality that they acquire in "wis-
dom of the marvelous inspection." The expression
"wisdom of non-discriminating nature" indicates the
ability of the eulightened man to penetrate to the heart


128                      ZEN KEYS
of reality itself, without being paralyzed by duality.
   The efforts of manovijnana alone do not culminate
in enlightenment. In the first place, since the ve1y basis
of the manovijnana is alaya, a genuine transformation
must be realized at the heart of alaya; secondly, reality
itself is not revealed in the manovijnana, which still
clings to dualism. For this reason, alaya itself must be
put into action in order that it transform the seeds
 (bijas) of the two attachments (the errors concerning
1/Not-I, subject/object). Each moment in which the
manovijnana is enlightened by the paratantra and the
nispanna is a moment of awareness of being, a moment
of Zen, in which all vikalpa image is absent.
       *
The Process of Enlightenment
LET US READ THE FOLLOWING        important passage in the
Lankavatara Sutra, in order to understand clearly the
process of enlightenment of Zen and Vijnanavada:
   Mahamati, the five sorts of dharmas are:
   representations [nimitta], names [nama], disclim-
   ination [vikalpa], thusness [tathata] and true wis-
   dom [samya-jnana].
      All forms, colors, and images, etc. are called rep-
   resentations [nimitta].
      From these representations concepts are formed,
   such as the concept of the base on the model .. this
   is this," "this is not that," etc. It is this which is
   called name [nama]. "Conscious-knowledge" and


                 FOOTPiliNTS OF EMPTINESS               129
    their functions, which give rise to these concepts,
    are called discdmination [vikalpa].
       These representations and concepts are not true
    things that can be obtained; they are only the
   product of discrimination. The true nature of
    things, liberated from this discrimination, is called
    thusness [tathata].
       Mahamati, these are the characteristics of thus-
   ness: reality, exactitude, ultimate end, true nature,
   foundation and non-obtaining.
       The Buddhas and myself have realized and ex-
   pounded thusness.
       All those who are capable of making good use
   of this exposition in order to penetrate into thus-
   ness, can transcend concepts of continuity and dis-
   continuity~ get rid of discrimination-imagination,
   and reach the spiritual experience of self-realiza-
   tion, an experience unknown to philosophers, Srava-
   kas and Pratyekabuddhas. This is called True
   Wisdom [samyagjnana].
       Mahamati, the five sorts of dhannas that I have
   just expounded to you imply the essential doctrine
   of three nahues, of eight vijnanas and of the two
   stages of nairatmyas (no true identity) .
       Mahamati, you must use your ability to realize
   these dharmas. Once you have realized them, your
   mind will be confirmed; nothing will be able to dis-
   turb you.
   By way of illush·ation, we can use a circle with G at
its center. The circle, perfectly round, symbolizes the
reality of the tathata, which reveals only the hue non-
discriminating and non-dualistic wisdom. In the un-
enlightened state, however, what we take for our
world of reality is only the world of discrimination
(vikalpa) which is manifested on the tathata basis. In


130                     ZEN KEYS
               World of    C
            tathata and
             true wisdom
this world of disclimination, subject and object, repre-
sentation and name, are revealed. By peneh·ating
through skillful means we come back to the world of
tathata and true wisdom. But that does not imply the
disappearance of the world of phenomena. What disap-
pears is discrimination-imagination. The world of phe-
nomena is revealed in true wisdom without being veiled
by vikalpa. The world of phenomena is but one with
the world of tathata, in the same way that waves
cannot be separated from the sea.
   The passage quoted from the Lankavatara now be-
comes clearer. The expression "penetration by skillful
means" makes us think of the Sraddhotpada Sastra in
which Asvaghosa speaks of the efforts of penetration
by a clever use of words and concepts. In Buddhism,
the language of the enlightened man aims at expound-
ing the way of realizing the tathata. This language,
which has its source in wisdom that transcends word
and concept, must, however, use words and concepts.
When we reach absolute reality, while using this Ian-


               FOOTPRINTS OF EMPTINESS                131
guage of words and concepts we practice what the
Lankavatara calls "penetration by skillful means."
   Although Zen declares that it is not based on words
and phrases, it in fact manipulates words and concepts
in order to reveal the reality which transcends words
and concepts. The Master achieves success or failure
according to whether his disciple can or cannot "pene-
u·ate by skillful means" when the Master's pole is held
out to him. If the disciple is attached to the word of his
Master in the way of vikalpa, the release of enlighten-
ment will be impossjble for him. It must be clearly
understood that though Zen Masters will not allow their
disciples to spend their time in studying the Madhya-
mika and the Vijnanavada, it is not because these doc-
trines contradict Zen; in fact, they can very well illus-
trate the history of Zen. But Zen is not the study of
Zen; Zen is life. Zen is direct contact with reality. The
Madhyamika and Vijnanavada doctrines can explain
many things, but they do not put the practitioner in
direct contact with living reality. Zen can only be lived
and expe1ienced. As Master Tue Trung Thuong Si said,
"This marvelous piece must be played." What is the
good of discussing a musical masterpiece? It is its per-
formance that counts.




        VI
THE REGENERATION
     OF MAN




       *
Monastic Life
LIFE IN A ZEN MONASTERY is well organized. The Zen
monastic tradition is still the same in present-day
monasteries as it was when it began at the time of
Master Po Chang (72o-814). The monastic code was
set down by Po Chang himself and carries his name.
The monastery where Po Chang lived was situated in
the Ta Hiong Mountain at Hong Chou in the province
of Kiang Hi. The name of the mountain was later
changed to that of Po Chang.
   The rules of Po Chang are a synthesis of the spirit of
the Hinayanist and Mahayanist disciplines. The mo-
nastic tradition of the Zen school began to be distinct
and independent of the monastic tradition of the Vinaya
school of that time.
   The monastery is placed under the direction of a
Superior, vien chu or giam vien. The monk who has
the role of administrative director is called tri su, and he
is responsible for the monastery as if it were a commu-
nity or an organization. The monk tri vien has charge of
the garden and grounds, the thu kho that of the grana-
ries, the tri tang that of the library, the tri dien and the
huong dang that of the sanctuary. The tri khach looks
after the visitors, monks, and lay people; the duy na is
in charge of the recitation meetings and the ceremo-
nies; and the tri chtmg is charged with problems con-
cerning relations between members of the community.
There are some jobs that are done by everybody in
turn; the monks who are responsible for them during


                         ZEN KEYS
the day are called the tri nhat. The young and the
novices (sramanera) fill the role of thi gia (attendants)
in order to help the Grand Masters in their daily ex-
istence, and in order to learn from them the way to
conduct themselves in monastic life.
   Twice a month the Buddha Sanctuary reunites all
the monks for the bo tat ceremony, a review of the
observance of the bhikhu rules, of which there are 250,
and of the fifty-eight rules of Bodhisattva. The novices
do not participate in the recitation of these rules. They
have their own novitiate· rules, of which there are ten,
and their manual of conduct to recite together in an-
other room in the monastery. The six principles of the
luc hoa community life, "the six ensembles," are also
repeated:
1.   To live together in the same conditions.
2. To observe the same rules.
3· To speak carefully to avoid dispute.
4· To share one's goods.
5· To share different points of view.
6. To create harmony of opinion in order to maintain
     the joie de vivre in the community.
   The monks get up at four o'clock in the morning to
the sound of the baa chung bell. They have fifteen
minutes to wash, dress, and make their beds. Then they
gather in the Meditation Hall and take up the lotus
posture.
   A monk stands by the bao chung bell and chants the
meditation chant, accompanied by the sound of this
bell. It is a prelude chant:
      The fifth division of the night has ah·eady begun
   and the gateway to reality is open.
      I would that the whole world were on the path
   of prajna wisdom.


               THE REGENERATION OF MAN                 137
      That each of us should penetrate deeply into
    the doCtrine of the three vehicles and realize the
    harmony between the two Truths.
      That the sun of marvelous wisdom should rise
    and dispel all the clouds of darkness.
    The great bell emits regular and slow clangs dming
 the meditation period (tao tien).
    After the tao tien everyone assembles in the sanctu-
 ary for the recitation of the sutras.
    Breakfast normally consists of a bowl of rice, some-
 times mixed with beans. It is eaten with pickled vege-
tables and soya sauce. Silence is maintained dming
eating; the meal finished, the Prafnaparamita Hridaya
 (Heart of Perfect Wisdom) is recited.
    After breakfast each goes about his task. The house-
work is done, the sanctuary floor is washed; some monks
work in the garden or in the fields, carry water, or look
for firewood.
    At 11:30 A.M. there is a short rest. Lunch is at mid-
day and is the p1incipal meal of the day. In accordance
with the summons of the baa chung bell, one washes
and dresses in the ao trang, then goes to the refectory
in procession and sits upright on his seat in front of his
bowl. The nieal proceeds according to a ceremony; body
and mind are fixed on the content of the meal. From
2:30 until 5:30 there is a work period, just as in the
morning. The evening meal, if there is one, consists of
rice soup and the left-overs from lunch.
   The period for the recitation of the sutras begins at
7:00 in the evening. After 8:oo comes the time of
study and practice of zazen. Bedtime follows the end
of the last meditation period. Anyone may continue
to meditate very late into the night.


The Retreats
EAcH YEAR, from the fifteenth of the fourth lunar
month to the fifteenth of the seventh month, the ket ha
season is organized. During this period one does not
leave the monastery and intensively practices toa thien
 (meditation in the lotus posture). Monks who live alone
in distant pagodas return to their monaste1y according
to tradition, in order to participate in the ket ha sea-
son. During this period a great deal is leamed about
spiritual things.
   Sometimes ket dong seasons, which also last three
months, are organized in the winter. These allow who-
ever could not leave his pagoda or community during
the summer ket ha to participate in ket dong.
   Outside the collective meditation hall, which can
sometimes hold up to several hundred monks, there also
exist little Zen huts for one person called that or coq.
In Vietnam, especially in the southern part, many of
these little Zen huts are found. The climate is warm in
the southem region, and it is ample protection to con-
struct small huts with bamboo and coconut palm leaves
in a very simple way. A Zen practitioner can remain in
his coq three years, or one year, or three months, ac-
cording to his liking. A novice is appointed to assist him
druing this period of intensive Zen practice.
   The pedod during which a Zen monk intends to be
alone in his coq ( nhap that) is truly a period of ab-
solute retreat. The monk does not leave the vicinity of
the coq. The novice who attends him maintains con-
nections between the monastery and the coq; he gets


               THE REGENERATION OF MAN                  139
water, rice, vegetables, fruit, etc. The monk in retreat
may do his own cooking. In his coq there is only a
bed (which also serves as a meditation seat), a table,
a lamp, a towel, a toothbrush, and some sutra texts.
The monk, during this absolute retreat, rarely speaks or
does not speak at all. His assistant must be very at-
tentive; he must know what his Master needs, be at-
tentive to him, and make his life as comfortable as pos-
sible. While assisting a Master in retreat, a novice can
learn in silence many things.
   For the most part the ket ha, ket dong, and nhap that
periods are devoted to the practice of toa thien. The
practitioner sits on his Zen seat in the lotus posture, the
right foot placed on the left leg and left foot placed on
the right leg. He holds his head up and his spine very
straight, keeps his eyes down, and places the left hand
on the right hand. The lotus posture is a very stable
and energizing position. Beginners may feel pain in
this position. They must begin by the half lotus position,
the right leg placed on the left leg, or vice-versa.
   Mter several hours stationary in the lotus posture,
the practitioner may get up and walk in kinh hanh,
that is to say, a vmy slow walk in the meditation hall
or around the coq. If the toa thien is practiced collec-
tively, the time of kinh hanh will be fixed in advance.
One walks in file, ve1y slowly, silently, with eyes low-
ered, several times around the meditation hall in a
clockwise direction. Meditation is continued while walk-
ing. Alternating toa thien and kinh hanh ensures that
the blood circulation is maintained and eases the pain
in the legs.
   But Zen is not only practiced during toa thien and
kinh hanh. It is necessary to learn to remain in Zen even
wl1ilc cultivating the vegetables, sweeping the court-
yard, washing clothes, or washing the dishes. Many Zen


                          ZEN KEYS
Masters have come to enlightenment during their daily
work. It is essential that a Zen practitioner be able to
live Zen at each moment of the day. Them is no en-
lightemnent outside daily life.
The Encounter
FROM TIME TO TIME meetings are organized during
which the disciple finds himself face to face with his
teacher in an encounter.! He then tells his teacher
about his experiences, his difficulties, and his doubts.
He may also present to his teacher his view of Zen in
order to get instructions. These meetings are called
tham thien or Zen encounters. Questions and answers
may sometimes be expressed very energetically. The
disciple then has the opportunity to present himself
and to present his individual case. The individual en-
counters of this smt, as well as the impromptu en-
counters between the Master and a group of monks in
a corridor or in a garden, are called tieu tham or
small encounters. The encounters that take place at
fixed times, in which the whole assembly participates,
are called dai tham or great encounters.
    The exchange of questions and answers during these
 great encounters may have the appearance of fmmida-
ble confrontations. A monk presents himself to the Mas-
 ter, before the entire assembly, and exposes himself to
 a severe test. The Master uses questions, sometimes yells
    1 Sansen in Japanese.


               THE  REGENERATION OF     MAN
or blows, in order to put the disciple to the test. Every-
body attends as a witness to the scene, in a state of
tension that arouses awareness of being in them. Monks
who voluntarily offer themselves to the test are de-
scribed as "entering into com bat" (xu at tran) .
   Enlightened monks sometimes leave the monastery
in order to live in a private hut, to become Masters in a
new monaste1y, or to go on a journey.
       *
The Role of the Laity
ZEN, HOWEVER, does not belong to monks only. Eveiy-
one can study and practice it. Many laymen have
been recognized as illustrious Zen Masters, and have
aroused the respect of the monks themselves.
   The laity are related to the monastelies by the ma-
terial support they provide to them, as it sometimes
happens that the labor of the monks may not be suf-
ficient to ensure the upkeep of the monaste1y. The laity
are also related to the monasteries by their pmticipation
in the construction of temples and sanctuaries and by
their cultural activities; for example, the p1inting and
publishing of sulras and scriptural works by monks. A
good number of monasteries each month organize bat
quan trai gioi for laymen who wish to live for twenty-
four or forty-eight hours in a monaste1y exactly like
monks. Places are reserved for them for these periods
of bat quan trai gioi, during which they practice Zen
under the dircdion of monks.
   It is through Llw close i11teraction of the laity and


                         ZEN KEYS
the monks that the essence of Zen peneh·ates social
life. Zen influences the poetry, painting, architecture,
and music. The traditions of Bower arrangement, tea
ceremony, calligraphy, Chinese ink painting and water
color have their source in the spiritual reality of Zen.
Zen is not only reflected in the technique of art but also
by the essence of the art. The technique reflects the
self-mastery of the artist, while the content reflects
the degree of spirituality of the artist. The a1ts are
here the connecting link between the spiritual world of
Zen and the technical world of men.
       *
 The Zen Man and the World of Today
THE PICTURE of the enlightened man is that of a free
man who possesses spiritual force and who is not the
plaything of chance. The practitioner, once enlightened,
sees himself in his true nature, knows himself, and pos-
sesses a clear view of reality-the reality of his being
and of the social situation. This vision is the most pre-
cious fruit that Zen can offer to a man. The way of
being of the enlightened man is considered to be his
most fundamental and most beneficent contribution
to all life. Zen is a living tradition which can help
to make sober, healthy, well-balanced, and stable peo-
ple. The arts and thought that have their source in the
enlightenment of Zen also possess this sobriety, this vi-
tality, and this clear-sighted serenity.
    Contemporary man is dragged along in a prod.ucing
and consuming cog-wheeled system to the point where


               THE REGENERATION OF MAN                143
he begins to become a part of the machine and loses
mastery of himself. Daily life dissipates our spirit, eats
up our time and thus does not leave the opportunity
to become aware of ourselves and to return to our
deeper self. Accustomed as we are to being constantly
"occupied," if these occupations should happen to be
taken from us, we find ow-selves empty and abandoned.
We then refuse to confront ourself and instead go off
in search of friends, to mix in with the crowd, to lis-
ten to the radio or to the television, to get rid of this
impression of emptiness.
   Present-day life, agitated to the exh·eme, makes us
very easily irritated. Emotions shake us several times
each day; they dominate and possess us. They influ-
ence our decisions to a considerable extent. If we are
no longer ourselves, how can we say that it is we who
live and decide our life?
   Life today is organized according to "reason"; man
participates in life with only part of his being-his
intellect, his manovijnana. The other half, deeper and
more important, is the unconscious, the fundamental
foundation into which the roots of his being are thrust.
This pa1t is alaya, it cannot be analyzed by reason and
by the manovijnana itself. The man of today loves rea-
son. He trusts himself to rationality. He is uprooted
from the basis of his h·ue being. From this comes the
feeling of alienation from which he suffers and through
this, little by little, his humanity becomes more and
more mechanical.
   The revolt of the younger generation, in the capital-
ist as well as in the socialist countries, is witness to
the desire of man to recapture his human nature. It is
not known yet where this revolt will lead us. But one
thing is sure: if men are unable to create a new path
by which to rediscover their hue natme, the human
race is condemned to disappear before long.


144                      ZEN KEYS
   Never in all history has man had to face such ter-
rible dangers. He is at the point where he is no longer
sure of being able to control the situation. The eco-
nomic, political, and milita1y systems he has established
have turned against him and imposed themselves upon
him. Such is the cause of the phenomenon of the "de-
humanization of man."
       *
Future Perspectives
LET us coNSIDER, for example, the problem of food.
The world population is presently 3·5 billion, and two
thirds of this population go to bed at night on an empty
stomach. According to sociologists, in the year .zooo,
that is to say, in less than thirty years' time, the popu-
lation of the world will have doubled-it will be 7 billion
people. How can the world support such a population
when its resources are not unlimited and the problem
of feeding the present population bas not yet been
solved?
   The Third World War will not be unleashed by the
great powers; it will break out first in the zones of
famine and oppression. Famine and political oppression
are the most profound causes for all war. Today all
wars (Vietnam, the Middle East) have an international
character; the great powers are engaged in them to
a greater or lesser extent because their influence and
their prestige are tied in large measure to these wars.
People on all sides trembled dming the crises of Cuba


                THE REGENERATION OF MAN                145
and the Middle East. We know a world war can explode
at any moment. A false alert, like that which was pro-
duced in the United States at the beginning of 1971,
was sufficient to create a complete panic. Will man
possess the coolness necessa1y to control the situation?
It takes only 250 atomic projectiles to destroy almost
the entire continent and people of America. The same
quantity is sufficient to destroy the Soviet Union. In
1970 the United States ah·eady possessed 2,500 of these
projectiles and the Soviet Union 1,500. By 1975 the
United States will have 8,ooo of them and the Soviet
Union 5,ooo. The buttons are always in reach of men.
   From another standpoint, insecticides and defoliating
agents, used in the wars and also in agriculture, have
affected the entire ecological system of the earth. Ac-
cording to a study done by UNESCO, the pelican
species has begun to be extinguished along the coast of
California. It has been estimated that all the eggs in all
but five of twelve hrmdred pelican nests were infected
by DDT and could not hatch. The conclusion of the
UNESCO report is that "Man will perhaps perish by
his own fault."2
   Paul R. Erlich, professor of biology at Stanford Uni-
versity, stated at the "Man and His Environment"
conference organized in San Francisco in November
1969, "Theoretically the new techniques of agliculture
should be able to increase the production of food to
feed the seven billion people, but practically speaking,
it is an impossible thing." Professor Sterling Bunell
added, "If we hy to slow down famine by applying
all the techniques that we know, such as the use of
chemical fertilizers and insecticides, we would com-
pletely contaminate our biological environment. Noth-
ing could survive in it, including man."
   2 International Herald Tribune, Paris, December 1, 1959.


                         ZEN KEYS
    The separation between the rich countries and the
underdeveloped countries gets greater and greater, and
one cannot expect that this separation will disappear
in the future. The debts that the poor counhies must
pay to the rich each year are greater than the sum
they receive as aid to help them develop economically.
The lack of capital, the lack of political stability, and
the necessity to resist exploitation canied on by the
great economic powers, increase the difficulties and ob-
stacles that the poorer counh·ies meet on the way to
liberation.
    At the same time the affiuent society of the West
consumes the greater pa1t of terreshial resources and
pollutes the earth and its atmosphere by this consump-
tion. The population of the United States, for example,
represents only 6 per cent of the world's population;
but it consumes nearly so per cent of the world's re-
sources. As another example of injustice, the popula-
 tion of Peru suffers from grave malnutrition. An impor-
tant anchovy fishing industry exists on the coast of Peru,
in which the United States, Great Britain, and France
have invested large amounts of capital. The anchovies
are very rich in protein, but the population has the
privilege of consuming only 6 per cent of the harvest
of anchovies. Ninety-four per cent of this harvest is
bought by the great powers at a very low price to
use as food for beasts and fowls.
    This disequilibrium makes the situation more and
 more dangerous. Professor C. P. Snow, in a conference
 given at Westminster College in Missouri, declared
 that in just seven years' time the famine zones will
start to burgeon, becoming oceans of famine by the end
of the century (New York Times, November 13, 1968).
War, in these circumstances, cannot be avoided. Men
 of science, histmians, and sociologists have sounde(l the
 alarm. The young are in revolt. But the system of our


                THE REGENERATION OF MAN                  147
 society does not seem to change. Each of us, for the
most part, continues his daily life, contributing to the
maintenance and consolidation of the machinery of pro-
 duction and consumption. We eat, drink, work, and di-
vert ow·selves, as if nothing is going to happen.
       *
Is an Awakening Possible?
THE   PROBLEM THAT FACES US       is the problem of Awak-
ening. What we lack is not an ideology or a doctrine
that will save the world. ·what we lack is awareness of
what we are, of what ow· true situation really is.
Through this awakening we will rediscover our hu-
man sovereignty. Our situation is that of a man
mounted on a horse that does not wish to obey his mas-
ter. The way of salvation is, therefore, a new culture in
which human nature can rediscover itself.
   Zen, as all other living spiritual b·aditions of the East
or ·west, has contributed to the elevation of the spiri-
tual life of man, while clarifying the way of thought,
art, and culture. But, like so many others, Zen has de-
generated under the present forces of technological
civilization.
   The development of technology in the Western
countries has created the need to conquer the Afro-
Asian coiiillrics in order to ensw·e the possession of
markets and industrial material. The wars of liberation
continue. vVar absorbs the energies of nations and ag-
gravates !he pmbll·m of hunger, already difficult to re-
solve l>cl'allse uf lite rapid increase in population. All


                         ZEN KEYS
this turns society and the structure of its moral values
upside down.
   The Zen tradition has also been shaken. In Vietnam,
for example, the majodty of Zen monasteties are situ-
ated in distant regions in the mountains. War is destroy-
ing them or threatening them. Monks must evacuate the
monasteries and live in cities or in refugee camps.
Everybody is absorbed, either by the efforts of the war
or by efforts against the war. In China socialism mo-
bilizes the mass of the people to realize national goals,
and in part to increase the army. The development of
Japanese economy has made Japan into a Western-like
nation, in which many of the spiritual values have
given place to materialism. The temples and monaster-
ies must also participate in the present economic way
of life and be based upon the present social needs of
producing and consuming in order to exist. They can
no longer play their role of spiritual leadership, as in
the past. Zen is threatened on the very ground on
which it was born and developed.
   The West has begun to learn about Zen when it is
already on the way to disintegration. If there are young
people and Western intellectuals who appreciate Zen,
it is perhaps because they have had enough of the ma-
terial civilization and of the rationalist way. Techno-
logical civilization, based on logic and science, has
reached its culmination, and has begun to produce
crises and revolts. In this situation Zen appears as some-
thing fresh and comforting. Paradoxically, the citizens
of the countries of the Zen tradition tum toward a life
of material comfort and subscribe to a policy of
intensive industrialization of their country. Their time
and energies are almost completely devoted to it, and
this is the reason why things like Zen can no longer
continue to be important. The East, like the West, is
witness to the spiritual bankruptcy of man. The com-


               THE REGENERATION OF MAN                 149
 plete destmction of the human race can only be
 avoided by finding a new cultural direction in which
 the spiritual element will play its role of guide.
    As I have already said, what we need is not a doc-
 trine, but an awakening that can restore our spiritual
 force. What made Mahatma Gandhi's sbuggle a great
 success was not a doctrine-not even the doctrine of
non-violence-but Gandhi himself. In our day a lot is
written and read about the doctrine of non-violence,
 and people everywhere are trying to apply it. But they
cannot rediscover the vitality of the kind that Gandhi
had. The reason for this is that the "Gandhians" do not
possess the spiritual force of Gandhi. They have faith in
his doctrine but cannot set into motion a movement of
great solidarity because none of them possess the
spiritual force of a Gandhi and therefore cannot produce
sufficient compassion and sacrifice. But if we continue
to be dragged along by the present machinery of pro-
ducing and consuming, it will be difficult to build a
spiritual force. Gandhi dressed himself simply, walked
on foot, fed himself with frugality. The simplicity of
his life is witness not only to his emancipation with
regard to conditioning by material things, but also to a
great spiritual force. The sole point of departure for the
new civilization which we need can only be the de-
termination of man not to allow himself to be invaded
any longer by material goods, to conbibute no longer
to the consolidation of the present system of producing
and consuming. Those who are determined to struggle
against the cog-wheeled system for the recuperation of
human nature can be considered as men of the avant-
garde. Many young people who live in material abun-
dance have revolted. They have found a new need: the
need to be a human being. In reality, this need is not
truly new, it is one of the fundamental needs of man,
stifled by arbitrary needs. This need can be considered
as our greatest hope. It is the element that will bling


                         ZEN KEYS
to birth and cause to be developed the new civilization
of man in the future.
   The first phase of this civilization must be to estab-
lish social conditions in which life can be lived in a hu-
man way. "Awakened" people are certainly going to
form small communities where material life will be-
come simple and healthy. Time and energy will be -de-
voted to the emichment of spirituality. These communi-
ties will be like Zen monasteries of a modem style
where there will be no dogrria. In them the sickness
of the times will be cured and spiritual health will be
acquired; what will be produced in the way of art and
thought will contribute to the new "way."
   In the East, Zen monasteries still exist and the in-
fluence of Zen still remains in literature, art, and man-
ners. But the young W estemers seem more interested
in Zen than are the young people in the East, who are
more preoccupied with revolution and industrialization.
Many young people in the East have not yet tasted the
bitterness of materialism and the inhuman nature of
technological civilization. The rebhth of Buddhism in
many Asiatic countries in the twentieth century has
been indirectly the work of Western scholars who, by
their studies and researches, have manifested their ad-
miration for Buddhist art and thought. It is they who
have helped the Asiatics to regain confidence in their
own cultural heritage. The same thing is now happen-
ing with Zen Buddhism. Because Westerners are inter-
ested in Zen many Orientals may return to their own
sphitual tradition. It is only regrettable that Zen should
no longer be in its past splendor.
   Undoubtedly, even for enlightened men, however
 determined they may be, it is very difficult to go against
 the system. The question posed today is what must
 we do to prevent ourselves from being taken over by
 the system? Engaging in political or economic co11flid
 does not seem to be the answer.


              THE   REGENERATION OF MAN                151
   Man is turning toward the East to find new sources of
inspiration. In Eastern spirituality is found that tend-
ency toward universal harmony that refreshes the heart.
The East, although poor, has not suffered from fanati-
cism and violence during whole centuries as has the
West. But the East has been oppressed; the East has
risen all ready to struggle against the West with arms
that the West has used against it. This is why the
West has had difficulty in establishing a dialogue with
the East. In its effort to learn from the West the tech-
nology that will enable it to defend itself, the East
knows that it must be modest, ready to gather what it
does not know. But the majority of Westerners do not
possess this virtue of modesty in their approach to the
East. They are satisfied with their methodology, with
their principles; they remain attached to criteria and to
values of their own civilization while desiring to know
the East. They are afraid of losing their identity and this
is the principal cause of their difficulties.
Spirituality versus Technology
WESTERN CIVILIZATION has brought man to the edge
of the abyss. It has transformed him into a machine.
The "awakening" of a certain number of Westerners,
the awareness that they have acquired of the true
situation in which they find themselves-in which man
finds himself-has freed them of their superiority com-
plex. They arc on the way, engaged in the search for
new values.


                            ZEN KEYS
   On their side, some Asiatics have come to the West
with the intention of initiating the Western public in
their spiritual tradition. The intention is fine, but the
task is difficult. If there is not a sufficiently deep un-
derstanding of the Western culture and mentality, suc-
cess cannot really be had. There is the risk of simply
imposing the Oriental way of seeing on the Westerners,
who will find it difficult to accept. Zen is not a collec-
tion of rituals; it is 1ife. Westerners who live in different
social circumstances from those of the East cannot
merely imitate the Orientals. In the same way that
Chinese Zen has Chinese characteristics, so Western
Zen must be Western in its form.
   An effort is therefore necessary. The West must be
willing to get rid of its intellectual luggage and princi-
ples in order to prepare itself for the new experience.
Easterners who intend to help their Western friends
must also make efforts in order to better understand the
Western mentality and Western cultural and social cir-
cumstances. It is only through such efforts and such
collaboration that Zen will be able to become a living
tradition in Western soil.
   Zen is the way of realizing the "true man," as Lin
Chi called him. But the West also has spiritual tradi-
tions, formed in the course of its history and aiming at
realizing the "true man." The problem is, in reality,
that the majority of these spiritual sources, Western or
Eastern, have dried up. The religious institutions, for
 example, have become more political than spiritual
powers. Motivated by material and political interests,
 they are engaged in worldly conflicts and neglect their
 spiritual task.
   Technological civilization in the past continually cre-
 ated new needs of consumption, of which the majority
 are not truly indispensable. But this civilization also
 created suffering and tragedies which awaken in man
 his need for humanity. Religions must be conscious of


              THE REGENERATION OF MAN                 153
this need. With the means at their disposal, the
churches must again work to construct communities in
which a healthy and sober life can be lived, with the
realization that true happiness does not reside in the
ill-considered consumption of goods paid for by the
suffering, famine, and death of others, but in a life en-
lightened by the feeling of a constant responsibility for
one's neighbor.




              VII
      *        *
LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
      FoRTY-THREE KUNG-.ANs
    WITH COMMENTS AND VERSES
       OF TRAN  THAI TONG
           (1218-1277)




          TRANSLATED FOR THE Fm8T TIME
            BY    THICH NHAT HANH
             .ADAPTED BY   Luc  DECAUNES
1'RA.N THAI ToNG was the .first king of the Tran Dy-
nasty ( 12.25-1400) in Vietnam. He practiced Zen while
reigning. At forty-one years of age he gave up the
throne to his son, Tran Hoang, and devoted himself to
the most intensive practice of Zen. He is the author
of two books: the Thien Tong Chi Nam (Guide for Zen)
and the Khoa Hu (Lessons on Emptiness). The forty-
three kung-ans presented here are taken from this lat-
ter book.


       *
Questions and Answers
by Way of Introduction
ONE   DAY  when the Emperorl was visiting the pagoda
of Chan Ciao, Tong Due Thanh put this riddle to him:
"The World Honored One was born in the palace of
King Suddhodana, before having left Tusita heaven;
he had fulfilled the vow to save all living beings before
he left his mother's womb. What is the meaning of
this?"
   The Emperor replied, "All rivers reflect the moon in
their waters; there where there is no cloud, the blue
sky is seen."
   A monk asked, "Those who are not yet liberated
need instruction. What about those who are already
liberated?"
   The Emperor replied, "The clouds which form at
the summit of Nhac mountain are a pure white; the
waters which flow into the river Tieu are a clear blue."
   Another monk inquired, "When clouds arrive, the
 color of the mountains becomes soft; when the clouds
 depart, the grotto is lighter. Why is it said that the hid-
 den and the revealed are the same thing?"
   The Emperor replied, "Is there no one beyond my
 own descendants who would dare to walk blindfolded?"
   1 Tran Thai Tong himself. These dialogues are reported
 by his disciples.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                159
    A monk asked, "The Way is single: all the enlight-
 ened ones are on the same way back to the Source. Do
 you think that Lord Buddha should be the only one
 able to find a road?"
    The Emperor replied, "Spring rain waters all plants
in the same way, and yet the flowering branches can
be long or short."
   A monk asked, "Each person possesses his own per-
fect enlightened nature; why did the World Honored
 One have to go into the forest in order to realize the
Way?"
   The Emperor replied, "Because of injustice the pre-
cious sword is drawn from its scabbard; because of ill-
ness, rare medicines are taken out of their jar."
   A monk asked, "No longer allowing the dust to get
into one's eyes; no longer bringing on the itch by
scratching the skin: such is my vision of the Way. Do
you think that I have got somethingr•
   The Emperor replied, "Water which :Rows down the
mountain does not think that it :Rows down the moun-
tain. The cloud which leaves the valley does not think
that it leaves the valley."
   The monk remained silent. The Emperor continued,
"Do not think that non-thinking itself is the Way; non-
thinking is very far from the Way."
   The monk replied, "If it is really a question of non-
thinking, how is one able to say that it is far or that
it is not far?"
   The Emperor said, "The water which :Rows down
the mountain does not think that it :Rows down the
mountain; the cloud which leaves the valley does not
think that it leaves the valley."


                             1.
The Case
   The World Honored One was already born in the
palace of King Suddhodana, even before having left
the Tusita heaven; he had accomplished the salvation,
according to his vow, of all living beings, but he had not
yet left his mother's belly.
Commentary
   The identity of the knight is revealed even before
his sword has been drawn from the scabbard.
Verse
     A very small child who does not possess
     Even the form of a body,
     Leaves his village at midnight for the first time;
     Making his people cross the seas
     And visit distant countries
     Without the help of either a boat or a raft,
     He meets no obstacle.
                             2.
 Case
    The World Honored One had just been born into the
 world. With one hand pointing to the sky, the other
 to the earth, he said: "In the heavens and on the earth,
 I alone am the honored One."
 Commentary
    But one white cloud passes by the grotto, and a thou-
 sand birds stray far from their nest.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS               1.61.
Verse
  Siddhartha ought to have revealed his true identity
 When he was born in Suddhodana's palace.
 He took seven steps and with his hands
 Pointed to heaven and the earth.
 Because of this gesture who knows
 How many disciples were lost
                           3·
Case
   The World Honored One shows a flower to the as-
sembly; Kasyapa's face is transformed, and he smiles.
Commentary
   Open your eyes, look carefully; a thousand chains of
mountains separate he who reflects from the real.
Verse
 While he was looking at the flower
 That the World Honored One raised in his hand,
 Kasyapa that morning
 Suddenly found himself at home.
 To call that "transmission of the essential Dharma"
 Is to say that for him alone
 The chariot shaft is adequate b:ansport.
                           4·
Case
   A philosopher asked Buddha, whom he came to con-
sult, to neither speak nor be silent.


16.2                     ZEN KEYS
Commentary
   Other than my own descendants,
   Who would dare to walk with their eyes blindfolded?
Verse
              Is it known that it is difficult,
              Difficult to shut once more
              The door of the prison?
              Words and speech disappear,
              No support remains;
              If it is not a good horse,
              How can it succeed
              In such an admirable way?
                             5·
Case
   The World Honored One takes up his seat. Manjusri
rings the bell and announces, "Listen well, I beg you, to
the Dharma which the King of the Dharrnas teaches
 you. The Dharma taught by the King of the Dharrnas
is as it is."
Commentary
   On a guitar without strings the music of spring is
playing, its notes are heard across the ages.
Verse
Each utterance, each word is impeccable,
But one glimpses a tail-piece, which cannot be hidden.
 Here is a flute without holes in my hand,
Playing for you the universal Song of Peace.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
                           6.
Case
   Sword in hand, the Emperor of the Tan Kingdom
interrogates the Twenty-fourth Patriarch: "Are you al-
ready clear about the emptiness of the five skandhas
[aggregates]?" "Yes," replies the Patriarch. "Have you
crossed over Birth and Death?" ..Yes," replies the Pa-
triarch. "Can you give me your head?" "This body does
not belong to me, how much less does this head belong
to me?" The Emperor beheads him. White milk gushes
from the severed head, the Emperor's arm falls.
Commentary
   The sword at the neck of the knight: it beheads the
spring breeze.
Verse
The sharp blade sweeps through the air like lightning;
We must be aware of it, but there is nothing to fear.
I announce to you my departure this morning: I leave
      the country of waters and mists;
No one knows if some thought is not hidden beneath,
                           7·
Case
   The Great Master Bodhidharma goes to the Thieu
Lam pagoda at Lac Duong. For nine years he sits
facing the wall.
Commentary
   Watch out, don't go on sleeping!


                       ZEN KEYS
Verse
 The giant bird has taken a lot of trouble
 To reach the southern sea,
 But he regrets the long, long distance traversed.
 Last night, we drank too much at the Great Festival;
 This morning, it's more difficult to awaken.
                            8.
Case
   The Second Patriarch begs Bodhidharma to pacify his
mind. Bodhidharma says, ..Show me your mind, that I
may pacify it for you." The Second Patriarch replies,
"I have searched well, I cannot find it!" Bodhidharma
answers, "I have already pacified your mind."
Commentary
   Crowned with garlands, the three-year-old child
plays on the drum;
   The eighty-year-old man plays with a balloon.
Verse
If Mind is not-Mind, who can we ask for advice?
Is it possible to become an embryo once more?
This old monk who kids himself that he can calm the
      mind of another,
Has really made fun of the people around him
Without even being aware of it.
                            g.
Case
   Manjusri notices the presence of a lady who is sitting
in a trance near Buddha. He tries to awaken her, but


                  LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
in vain. Buddha then asks Vong Minh to awaken the
lady, and Vong Minh does so in one stroke.
Commentary
   This little horror has destroyed my whole fortune.
Verse
   Facing Buddha, no discrimination is possible.
   This trance does not appear to be a real trance.
  If Nature is impartial,
   When spring comes, it must be spring everywhere.
                           10.
Case
  During the thirty years that the Ho War lasted,
Master Ma To Dao Nhat never lacked for salt or soya
sauce.
Commentary
  This declaration is undoubtedly impeccable, but
the thing is still to eat with the fingers, all the while
holding the sticks.
Verse
Since he became the friend of this drunkard,
He has taken the liquor store as his own home.
When you brag about being a great knight,
Do you want to play forever the role of a man who
     lost his shirt?
                           11.
Case
  Bach Tmong returns to Ma To for another interview.
Ma To lets out a yell. Bach Truong is enlightened.


166                    ZEN KEYS
Commentary
  Better one blow with a pickax than a thousand taps
with a mattock.
Verse
            Formerly, when Way and Book
            Were not yet confused,
            I heard on all sides
            The humming of bees.
            Now, on my horse,
            The precious sword in my hand,
            I have perfect communion
            On the Way of Truth.
                           12.
Case
  The National Teacher one day calls his assistant
three times. And three times his assistant replies, "I am
here." "I thought," says the Master, "I had transgressed
against you, but in reality it is you who have trans-
gressed against me."
Commentary
  It is only he who drinks who knows exactly whether
the drink is warm or cold.
Verse
Both parties have the same talent.
On whom can one rely for a comparison?
My lungs and my entrails are exposed to your in-
     spection:
But it is I alone who knows my true situation.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
Case
   Dai Quy says, "'The concepts being and non-being
are like climbing plants which cannot survive on a
great tree." So Son replies, "If the tree is cut down, if
the plants are dried out, where will the concepts being
and non-being go?" Dai Quy then leaves with a great
burst of laughter.
Commentary
   Water which flows remains in the sea, the moon
which sets remains in the sky.
Verse
The sea is calm if the wind ceases to blow.
We take trouble in searching outside of ourselves.
A burst of laughter dissipates a hundred thousand
      doubts;
Pearls and stones are distinguished
Mter that.
Case
   Bach Truong asks Nam Tuyen, "What is the do<>
trine preached for the non-profit of peopler' Nam
Tuyen answers, "It is not the Mind, it is not the Buddha,
it is not a thing."
Commentan;
   Thousands upon thousands of wise men have
searched but the doctrine has not disclosed any traces:
they arc hiding in the great space.


168                     ZEN KEYS
Verse
The Kung-an is there, standing before you.
Face up to it squarely, look at it!
Have you understood it?
Invited to stay in the dwelling of Buddha,
We have always refused:
We are already accustomed to sleeping each night
      among the rushes.
Case
   Nam Tuyen says, "Mind is not the Buddha, Wisdom
is not the Way."
Commentary
   I yearn for the soul of the marvelous truth,
   And, coming back to myself, I walk beneath the
shining moon.
Verse
   Stars move with silent sounds;
   The universe is calm, nothing brings trouble.
   Leaning upon a stick, I climb up to the terrace.
   Perfect tranquility: nothing happens.
                            16.
 Case
   In order to instruct his disciples, after enlightenment,
 Master Lam Te only uses a stick and yells. Each time
 he sees a monk, he yells.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                 16g
Commentary
   At midday on the fifth day of the fifth month, all the
poisons of the mouth and of the tongue are neutralized.
Verse
Scarcely having arrived at the threshold, one hears
     the yell;
Children and adolescents wake up.
The first clap of thunder in spring,
Everywhere the green buds burst forth on the branches.
Case
   Master Nam Tuyen says, "Everyday thought, that
is the Way."
Commentary
   H it is cold, say "cold"; if it is warm, say ..warm."
Verse
The precious stone has an immaculate nature;
Its beauty does not depend on the work of the jeweler.
If this road back is not followed,
You let go and fall into the deep valley.
                           18.
Case
   Master Trieu Chau says, "You are controlled by the
twenty-four hours of the day; I control the twenty-four
how·s of the day.


170                    ZEN KEYS
Commentary
  He calls himself Master and despises people. His
speech has no foundation.
Verse
The old man kids himself
That he can, twenty-four hours each day,
Tame fiery dragons and ferocious tigers.
In truth, the one who knows how to change iron into
     gold
Will not go to the point of telling all those he meets
     in the street.
                           I g.
Case
   A monk questions Lam Te, "What is the true man of
no rank?' Lam Te replies, "Dried shit."
Commentary
  Aiming at the sparrow with an unloaded rifle,
   Shiking a mouse with a stick that he doesn't want
to soil!
Verse
The true man of no rank is nothing but dried shit;
How Buddhists must be led astray by such a teaching!
Look and consider once morel
Don't you see it yet?
When the clay buffalo walks in the sea, it does not
     leave any footprints.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS             171
                            20.
Case
   Master Trieu Chau says, "I have found the old lady
of the Ngu Dai Son mountain."
Commentary
   Whoever has committed the five major crimes is for-
bidden to stuff his ears when thunder growls.
Verse
In the wink of an eye, Ngu Dai Son mountain has dis-
     appeared;
Without having walked for days, here suddenly one is
     at home;
If the war is finished and no-one dreams any more of
     vengeance,
What need has he of taking his sword from its
     scabbard?
                            21.
Case
   Golden buddhas cannot save the crucible, nor
wooden buddhas the fire, nor clay buddhas the water.
The true Buddha is sitting in the sanctuary.
Commentmy
   Mountain is mountain, river is river. Where is the
Buddha?
Verse
     If Cuong Xuyen's picture has such renown,
     It is thanks to the famous poet Vuong Duy.


172                     ZEN KEYS
      I have my talent also, but what must I paint?
      In space one sees the moon,
      And one feels the freshness of the wind.
                           22.
Case
   Master Trieu Chau says, "When I was at Thanh
Chau, I made a linen robe which weighed seven
pounds."
Commentary
   Tan Chau's radishes, they are acceptable; but
Thanh Chau's linen-that only upsets people!
Verse
It is a very spectacular linen robe!
How could Trieu Chau's bamboo trunk contain such
      a robe?
One is meticulous; one distinguishes ounces and half-
      ounces;
But at will and without pity one holds up to scorn
The eight Manh brothers who lodge in the Eastern
      neighborhood.
Case
   On being questioned as to whether the dog possesses
the Buddha nature, Trieu Chau replies once ..yes,"
replies once "no."


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                 173
Commentary
   Two choices, one chance.
Verse
    Confronted by people, you can say yes or no;
    A single word put Ho's army to rout.
    He boasts all his life of being someone brilliant
    Who is only a distant relative of a true knight.
Case
   Master Tlieu Chau said, "There where Buddha re-
sides, do not stop. There where Buddha does not reside,
pass quickly by!"
Commentary
   The water which collects makes a pool; the stick
which strikes the earth leaves a mark
Verse
Residing, not residing-the two things do not reside
     at all.
Words are never perfect.
After the flower was shown to the assembly, the fact
     could be recounted.
In Buddha's country one arrives
Without having taken a single step.
Case
   Showing his bamboo cane. Master Thu Son says to
them, "Call this a bamboo cane, and you have fallen


174                      ZEN KEYS
into my trap. Do not call it a bamboo cane, and you fall
into error. Well, what do you call it?"
Commentary
   Don't move! Whoever moves gets thirty blows of my
stick.
Verse
Difficult it is to choose between the cane and the non-
       cane.
Who can give a clear and exact reply?
The Way is there, as always,
But so many obstacles are yet to be met.
                            26.
Case
   A monk asks Dong Son, "What is the Buddha?" And
Dong Son replies, "Three pounds of flax hanging on the
      ••
w all.
Commentary
   To call (Buddha) a thing is not correct.
Verse
What is the Buddha, I will tell you:
The three pounds of linen Dong Son hangs on his wall.
Even if people were no longer to engage
In speculative research,
It is still necessary to use things
To point to the tmth.


                  LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                 175
                            2J.
Case
   "What was the Patriarch Bodhidharma's intention?''
asks a monk of Hien Tu. And Hien Tu, answers "The
liquor table before the spirits' shrine."
Commentary
   A real lion's cub will not race after a rolling lump of
earth.
Verse
All its roots cut, the tree is felled.
I will tell you what I have seen with my own eyes.
To say, "The Patriarch's intention is the liquor table in
     front of the shrine"
Is to say, "The pants are the trousers!"
                            28.
Case
   The National Master Vo Nghiep says, "If a discrim-
ination is made between enlightenment and non-
enlightenment, even as small as the point of a hair, it
will cause people to be reborn donkeys and horses."
The monk Bach Van Doan replies, "Even though this
point of hair discriminating between enlightenment and
non-enlightenment should disappear, people nonethe-
less will be born donkeys and horses."
Commentary
   'When one burns the forest, the tigers flee; when
one beats the bushes, snakes become afraid.


                        ZEN KEYS
Verse
The formulation is still very feeble!
What is the good of beating the bushes to make snakes
      afraid?
If the road to the Capital is really known,
There is no need to go to the trouble of asking others.
                            29·
Case
   Master Huyen Sa says to the Assembly, "The Hon-
ored Ones often speak of the efforts intending to show
people the Way of Salvation. Supposing a deaf, dumb,
and blind man were to arrive here. How would you
show him the Way? . . . If you show him your fly-
swat, he will not see it. If you speak to him about the
way of sitting in meditation, he will not hear you. If
you seek to teach him to recite the sacred texts, he will
not be able to pronounce a single word."
Commentary
   We eat when we are hungry, we drink when we are
thirsty, we cover ourselves when it is cold, we fan our-
selves when it is warm.
Verse
   When sad one cries and when joyful one laughs,
   The nose is vertical, the eyebrows horizontal;
   Hunger and thirst, warmth and cold, are natural.
   Why set problems
   Which don't really exist?


                    LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                 177
                              30.
 Case
    Master Thuy Nghiem often said to himself, "Wake
 up! Wake up! Don't allow people to despise you any
 longer."
 Commentary
    It isn't worth the trouble to cry until the blood gushes
 from the mouth: it is better to shut up and wait until
 the spring has passed.
 Verse
 Thuy Nghiem often said to himself, "Wake up!"
 But he is not truly very courageous!
 H he believes himself to be an invincible hero,
 He should overthrow the sun and make it fall to the
       earth!
Case
   "I will take up the life of politics," says Tam Thanh,
"if it should happen that a great statesman should
arise; but if I take it up, it will not be in any way for
him." Hung Hoa replies, "If a great statesman of tal-
ent should arise, I will not take up a political life; and
if I take it up, it is for him that I will do so."
Commentary
   A blind tortoise forms a friendship with two para-
lyzed tortoises.


                          ZEN KEYS
Verse
One does not drink dirty water each time one is thirsty.
Simply to talk of food does not fill the stomach.
The child must refrain from licking the grains of sugar
      which stay on the knife,
If he doesn't wish to cut his tongue.
                             32·
C(J$e
   Master N am Tuyen shows a vase to Dang An Phong
who has just arrived, and says to him, "The vase is an
object; one must not be attached to objects."
Commentary
   If this object exists, to what is he attached?
Verse
The clarity of the mirror
Has nothing to do with the dust;
What is the good of so much trouble to get rid of the
      dust?
One must rejoice calmly
In all circumstances.
Have a cup of tea
Mter your dinner!
                              33·
Case
   Master Tach Dau says, "It cannot be left thus; it
cannot not be left thus; it can neither be left thus nor
not be left thus."


                  LESSONS ON EMPTINESS                  179
Commentary
   Everything is impermanence, everything is suffering.
Verse
      I have a very touching story to tell you;
      But wait until this cloud passes our grotto.
      Even if I can tell you
      This story in a perfect way,
      The distance between us
      Is still ten thousand miles.
                             34·
Case
   A monk asks Master Giap Son, "How is it, Giap Son's
world?" "Canying his little one in his arms, the monkey
returns to its virgin forest, while the flower petals strew
the ground of the green valley."
Commentary
   Take a stick with you, and you will dance everywhere
there are people.
Verse
   No one has visited the distant world of Giap Son.
   But in any case you must consider doing so.
   Those who are among the enlightened
   Who see by their eyes of Great Wisdom,
   Can be shown midday at midnight.


180                      ZEN KEYS
                            35·
Case
   A monk asks Master Muc Chau, "The great
Tripitaka Collection, can it be read in the time of a
breath?" And Muc Chau replies, "If Tat La, the cake
seller, comes by here, tell him to come."
Commentary
   One returns home without going to the trouble of
walking.
Verse
The Tripitaka is read in the time of a breath;
No one has need to consider each word, each phrase;
The profom1d truths disclose themselves in a natural
      way;
It is not necessary to consult the hermit on the hill.
Case
    One day, in an encounter presided over by Master
Lam Te, two senior monks started to yell at the same
time. An ordinary monk questioned Lam Te, "In the
present case, is there a distinction between the consultor
and consulted?" And Lam Te replied, "It is obvious
that the consultor and consulted are there."
Commentary
    Some white monkeys with absurd gesticulations.


                  LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
Verse
The voice of the Enlightened One is heard in the wind,
The meaning of a kung-an is not something other.
Lam Te knows well how to measure land and rice
      paddies;
He divides them into lots and distributes them to the
     population.
                           37·
Case
   Master Huyen Sa said, "I am like the owner of some
land, at the center of which I have planted a tree. I
want to sell all the land, but still remain owner of the
tree."
Commentary
   The Great Ocean is not big enough to receive a
corpse.
Verse
    Even if you have been enlightened,
    Even if your thoughts have ceased to assail you,
    There still remains a very small point to resolve:
    To consider gold and silver as dust.
Case
   A monk questioned Master Hue Tu on the essence
of Buddhism. Hue Tu replied, "What is the price of
rice at Lu Lang?"


182                     ZEN KEYS
Commentary
   The shadow of the bamboo branches sweeps the floor
of the veranda, but the dust does not move.
   In the water the moon is reflected, but nothing marks
the surface of the pond.
Verse
   The speech is worthy of a knight.
   It corresponds well to the mentality of the people
   And helps them on the Way of Salvation.
   What is the price of rice at Lu Lang?
  If you lmow it, you will no longer have to cover
   The distance of a thousand miles,
                           39·
Case
   A monk asks Van Thu Vien Minh, "Things go into
the One. But what does this One go into?" And Van
Thu replies, 'The Hoang Ha River consists of nine
sections."
Commentary
  The countryside beneath the moon was so beautiful,
I didn't realize that my boat had passed Thuong Chau.
Verse
I speak to you of the nine sections of the Hoang Ha
      River,
To help you regain your home
Without having to cross a long distance.
You have not stopped observing the outstretched net,
And you have let the bird pass by
Without having even noticed it.


                LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
Case
   Master Nam Tuyen asks of Trieu Chau, "Novice, do
you already have a Master, or do you not have one?"
Trieu Chau answers, "I already have a master." Nam
Tuyen asks, "What does it mean to have a Master?"
Trieu Chau rubs his hands and replies politely, "To-
day it is cold; I hope that the Very Honorable One
enjoys the greatest well-being."
Commentary
   For him who possesses quick hands, needles can re-
place cudgels.
Verse
While rubbing his hands Trieu Chau shows us
The thing which stands between these two e>..i:remes:
     the consultor and the consulted.
Is it not Hoa Lam's and Han Lenh's subterfuge,
If Hoi has retired from the contest?
                           41.
Case
   A monk questioned Master Moe Am, "It is said that
the monk's robe, made of scraps of cloth, is not worth
very much. What does that mean?" "The needle," re-
plied Moe Am, "cannot go through it."
Comnumtary
   In the perfect state of meditation, all discrimina-


                       ZEN KEYS
tions are absent: even a thread could not :6nd its way
in the space.
Verse
The monk's robe is soft like snow,
But needles of steel cannot pierce it.
Space is one, without a crack:
By what road does the perfume of the cinnamon flowers
Come to us at the end of the day?
                          42·
Case
   The layman Lung declares, "This is Buddha's exam-
ination. Those who pass the test of emptiness will be
declared winners."
Commentary
   In order that your name should ngure on the list of
winDers, don't leave blank pages.
Verse
     Can one make straw sandles
     With the feathers of a bird?
     Can one become a Buddha
     By taking part in this strange competition?
     Be on guard! Don't go and say
     That you will be crowned
     After you have passed the test of emptiness,
     Otherwise you will one day receive
     Some great blows of a stick.


                 LESSONS ON EMPTINESS
                            43·
Case
   Master Tu Minh asks Chan Diem Tru, "What is the
essence of Buddhism?" Chan Diem Tru replies, "Clouds
which form at the summit of the mountain do not
exist; but the reflection of the moon in the water does
exist." Tu Minh roars, "You have reached your age
and you submit such a stupid idea to mel" Chan Diem
Tru weeps. A moment later, he says to Tu Minh, "It
is obvious that I do not know what the essence of
Buddhism is, I beg you to clarify it for me." And Tu
Minh declares, "The clouds which are formed at the
summit of the mountain do not exist, but the reflection
of the moon in the water does exist." At these words
Chan Diem Tru is transfigured, and reaches enlighten-
ment.
Commentary
   Compassionate men think that that is humanism;
men of wisdom think that that is erudition.
Verse
The music that you play is equally mine.
We are friends who know each other thoroughly.
The mountain is above, the river below,
But the moon and the clouds still remain the same.


 religion
 Zen Keys
 Thich Nhat Hanh
 Introduction by Phff'f> Kapleau
 Translated by Albert and Jean Low
    Zen Keys is a unique explication of Zen Buddhism.
 Beginning with a discussion of the daily regimen of life in
 a Zen monastery, Thich Nhat Hanh illustrates the charac-
ter of Zen as practiced in Vietnam. 'o~wing from both
 historical and personal examples, the author explains the
 central philosophic concepts of Awareness, Imperman-
ence, and Not-1. But Zen is more than a philosophy, it is
 an attitude which must be involved in the awareness of all
that one is and does.
    As a leading spokesman of the Vietnamese Buddhist
peace movement, Nhat Hanh has practiced his religion in
the secular world. Rather than follow a· path of world-
denying self-illumination, he has integrated his beliefs and
his actions as a response to the needs of the culture and
society in which he lives. His example has particular sig-
nificance for Western readers as we attempt to develop
our own form of Zen for we too must create a living tradi-
tion applicable to our own situation. Zen Keys provides a
valuable link between the great Asian traditions and the
emerging outline of American Zen.
Cover Design by Bonnie and Hideo letaka
~'\A Doubieday Anchor Original             ISBN: 0-385-08066-2
0


 PEACE IS
EVERY STEP


                BOOKS BY THE SAME AUTHOR
                          Being Peace
Breathe! You Are Alive: Sutra on the FullAwareness of Breathing
                A Guide to Walking Meditation
       The Heart of Understanding: Commentaries on the
                  Prajiiaparamita Heart Sutra
      lnterbeing: Commentaries on the Tiep Hien Precepts
                  The Miracle of Mindfulness
                       The Moon Bamboo
 Old Path, White Clouds: Walking in the Footsteps of the Buddha
     Our Appointment with Life: The Buddha's Teaching on
                      Living in the Present
                         The Pine Gate
    Present Moment Wonderful Moment: Mindfulness verses
                        for Daily Living
                    A Rosefor Your Pocket
                       The Sun My Heart
     The Sutra on the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings
         Transformation and Healing: Sutra on the Four
                 Establishments of Mindfulness
                           Zen Poems


  Thich Nhat Hanh
 PEACE IS
EVERY STEP
 The Path oj Mincifulness
     in Everyday Life
     Edited by Arnold Kotler
      BANTAM BOOKS
   NEW YORK · TORONTO ' LONDON
        SYDNEY ' AUCKLAND


                                     PEACE IS EVERY STEP
                                      A Bantam Book
                                      PRINTING HISTORY
                    Bantam hardcover edition published March 1991
                       Bantam trade paperback edition/March 1992
                Bantam New Age and the accompanying figure design as
                well as the statement "the search for meaning, growth
                and change" are trademarks of Bantam Books, a division
                of Bantam Doubleday Dell Publishing Group, Inc.
                                     All rights reserved.
                        Copyright © 1991 by T hich Nhat Hanh.
                           Cover art © 1991 by Patricia Curtan.
                    Cover design by David Bullen and Michael Katz.
                              Composition: Wilsted & Taylor.
                 Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 90-47011 .
                No part of this book may be reproduced or transmitted in
                any form or by any means, electronic or mechanical, in­
                cluding photocopying, recording, or by any information
                storage and retrieval system, without permission in writ­
                ing from the publisher.
                         For information address: Bantam Books.
                 Published simultaneously in the United States and Canada
Bantam Books are published by Bantam Books, a division of Bantam Doubleday Dell Pub­
lishing Group, Inc. Its trademark, consisting of the words "Bantam Books" and the portrayal
of a rooster, is Registered in U.S. Patent and lrademark Office and in other countries. Marca
Registrada. Bantam Books, 1540 Broadway, New York, New York 10036.
                         PRINTED IN THE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA
                                BP30


                       C O N T E N T S
                              Foreword       Vll
                       Editor's Introduction       ix
                PART ONE:       Breathe! You Are Alive
Twenty-Four Brand-New Hours 5, The Dandelion Has My Smile 6, Con­
scious Breathing 8, Present Moment, Wonderful Moment 9, T hinking Less
I I, Nourishing Awareness in Each Moment 12, Sitting Anywhere 15, Sit­
ting Meditation 16, Bells of Mindfulness 18, Cookje of Childhood 20, Tan­
gerine Meditation 21, The Eucharist 22, Eating Mindfully 23, Washing
Dishes 26, Walking Meditation 27, Telephone Meditation 29, Driving
Meditation 31, Decornpartmentalization 34, Breathing and Scything 36,
Aimlessness 37, Our Life Is a Work of Art 39, Hope as an Obstacle 41,
Flower Insights 42, Breathing Room 45, Continuing the Journey 48
            PART TWO:        Tran sformation andHealing
The River of Feelings 51, Non-Surgery 52, Transforming Feelings 53,
Mindfulness of Anger 56, Pillow-Pounding 59, Walking Meditation
 When Angry 61, Cooking Our Potatoes 62, The Roots of Anger 63, Inter­
nal Formations 64, Living Together 67, Suchness 68, Look into Your Hand
�, Parents 70, Nourishing Healthy Seeds 7J, W hats Not Wrong? 7J,
Blaming Never Helps 78, Understanding 79, Real Love 80, Meditation on
Compassion 81, Meditation on Love 84, Hugging Meditation 85, Invest­
ing in Friends 87, It Is a Great Joy to Hold Your Grandchild 88, Commu­
nity of Mindful Living 89, Mindfulness Must Be Engaged 91


                PART THREE:      Peace Is Every Step
lnterbeing 95, Flowers and Garbage   C)6, Waging Peace 99, Not Two 100,
Healing the Woundr of War 101, The Sun My Heart 103, Looking Deeply
104, The Art of Mindful Living  106, Nourishing Awareness 109, A Love
Letter to Your Congressman 110, Citizenship   I I I, Ecology of Mind I13,
The Roots of War 114, Like a Leaf, We Have Many Stems 116, We Are All
Linked to Each Other 118, Reconciliation 119, Call Me by My True Names
121, Suffering Nourishes Compassion 125, Love in Action 126, The River
130, Entering the Twenty-First Century 133
                                   VI


                           Foreword
                   BY H. H. THE DALAI LAMA
Although attempting to bring about world peace through the
internal transformation of individuals is difficult, it is the only
way. Wherever I go, I express this, and I am encouraged that
people from many different walks of life receive it well. Peace
must first be developed within an individual. And I believe
that love, compassion, and altruism are the fundamental basis
for peace. Once these qualities are developed within an indi­
vidual, he or she is then able to create an atmosphere of peace
and harmony. This atmosphere can be expanded and ex­
tended from the individual to his family, from the family to
the community and eventually to the whole world.
   Peace Is Every Step is a guidebook for a journey in exactly
this direction. Thich Nhat Hanh begins by teaching mind­
fulness of breathing and awareness of the small acts of our
daily lives, then shows us how to use the benefits of mindful­
ness and concentration to transform and heal difficult psy­
chological states. Finally he shows us the connection between
personal, inner peace and peace on Earth. This is a very
worthwhile book. It can change individual lives and the life
of our society.


                   Editor� Introduction
As I walked slowly and mindfully through a green oak forest
this morning, a brilliant red-orange sun rose on the horizon. It
immediately evoked for me images of India, where a group of
us joined Thich Nhat Hanh the year before last to visit the sites
where the Buddha taught. On one walk to a cave near Bodh
Gaya, we stopped in a field surrounded by rice paddies and re­
cited this poem:
                Peace is every step.
                The shining red sun is my heart.
                Eachflower smiles with me.
                How green, howfresh all thatgrows.
                How cool the wind blows.
                Peace is every step.
                It turns the endless path tojoy.
These lines summarize the essence of Thich Nhat Hanh's mes­
sage-that peace is not external or to be sought after or attained.
Living mindfully, slowing down and enjoying each step and
each breath, is enough. Peace is already present in each step, and
if we walk in this way, a flower will bloom under our feet with
every step. In fact the flowers will smile at us and wish us well on
our way.
   I met Thich Nhat Hanh in 1982 when he attended the Rev-


T     H    I   e    H      N    H    A   T       H     A    N      H
erence for Life conference in New York. I was one of the first
American Buddhists he had met, and it fascinated him that I
looked, dressed, and, to some extent, acted like the novices he
had trained in Vietnam for two decades. When my teacher,
Richard Baker-roshi, invited him to visit our meditation center
in San Francisco the following year, he happily accepted, and
this began a new phase in the extraordinary life of this gentle
monk, whom Baker-roshi characterized as "a cross between a
cloud, a snail, and a piece of heavy machinery-a true religious
presence."
    Thich Nhat Hanh was born in central Vietnam in 1926 and
was ordained a Buddhist monk in 1942, at the age ofsixteen. Just
eight years later, he co-founded what was to become the fore­
most center of Buddhist studies in South Vietnam, the An
                             !
Quang Buddhist Institute.
    In 196 1, Nhat Hanh came to the United States to study and
teach comparative religion at Columbia and Princeton Univer­
sities. But in 1963, his monk-colleagues in Vietnam tele­
grammed him to come home to join them in their work to stop
the war following the fall of the oppressive Diem regime. He
immediately returned and helped lead one of the great nonvi­
olent resistance movements of the century, based entirely on
Gandhian principles.
    In 1964, along with a group of university professors and stu­
dents in Vietnam, Thich Nhat Hanh founded the School of
Youth for Social Service, called by the American press the "little
Peace Corps," in which teams of young people went into the
countryside to establish schools and health clinics, and later to re-
                                 x


P E A C E             I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
build villages that had been bombed. By the time of the fall of
Saigon, there were more than 10,000 monks, nuns, and young
social workers involved in the work. In the same year, he helped
set up what was to become one of the most prestigious publish­
ing houses in Vietnam, La Boi Press. In his books and as editor­
in-chief of the official publication of the Unified Buddhist
Church, he called for reconciliation between the warring parties
in Vietnam, and because of that his writings were censored by
both opposing governments.
   In 1966, at the urging of his fellow monks, he accepted an in­
vitation from the Fellowship of Reconciliation and Cornell
University to come to the U.S. "to describe to [us] the aspirations
and the agony of the voiceless masses of the Vietnamese people"
(New Yorker, June 25, 1966). He had a densely packed schedule
of speaking engagements and private meetings, and spoke con­
vincingly in favor of a ceasefire and a negotiated settlement.
Martin Luther King, Jr. was so moved by Nhat Hanh and his
proposals for peace that he nominated him for the 1967 Nobel
Peace Prize, saying, "I know of no one more worthy of the No­
bel Peace Prize than this gentle monk from Vietnam." Largely
due to Thich Nhat Hanh's influence, King came out publicly
against the war at a press conference, with Nhat Hanh, in
Chicago.
   When Thomas Merton, the well-known Catholic monk and
mystic, met Thich Nhat Hanh at his monastery, Gethsemani,
near Louisville, Kentucky, he told his students, "Just the way he
opens the door and enters a room demonstrates his understand­
ing. He is a true monk." Merton went on to write an essay, "Nhat
                                  Xl


T     H    I   e     H     N     H    A    T     H     A   N     H
Hanh Is My Brother," an impassioned plea to listen to Nhat
Hanh's proposals for peace and lend full support for Nhat
Hanh's advocacy of peace. After important meetings with Sen­
ators Fullbright and Kennedy, Secretary of Defense Mc­
Namara, and others in Washington, Thich Nhat Hanh went to
Europe, where he met with a number of heads of state and offi­
cials of the Catholic church, including two audiences with Pope
Paul VI, urging cooperation between Catholics and Buddhists
to help bring peace to Vietnam.
   In 1969, at the request of the Unified Buddhist Church of
Vietnam, Thich Nhat Hanh set up the Buddhist Peace Dele­
gation to the Paris Peace Talks. After the Peace Accords were
signed in 1973, he was refused permission to return to Vietnam,
and he established a small community a hundred miles south­
west of Paris, called "Sweet Potato." In 1976-77, Nhat Hanh
conducted an operation to rescue boat people in the Gulf of
Siam, but hostility from the governments of Thailand and Sin­
gapore made it impossible to continue. So for the following five
years, he stayed at Sweet Potato in retreat-meditating, reading,
writing, binding books, gardening, and occasionally receiving
visitors.
   In June 1982, Thich Nhat Hanh visited New York, and later
that year established Plum Village, a larger retreat center near
Bordeaux, surrounded by vineyards and fields of wheat, corn,
and sunflowers. Since 1983 he has travelled to North America
every other year to lead retreats and give lectures on mindful liv­
ing and social responsibility, "making peace right in the moment
we are alive."
                                 Xli


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
   Although Thich Nhat Hanh cannot visit his homeland,
handwritten copies of his books continue to circulate illegally in
Vietnam. His presence is also felt through his students and col­
leagues throughout the world who work full-time trying to re­
lieve the suffering of the desperately poor people of Vietnam,
clandestinely supporting hungry families and campaigning on
behalf of writers, artists, monks, and nuns who have been im­
prisoned for their beliefs and their art. This work extends to
helping refugees threatened with repatriation, and sending ma­
terial and spiritual aid to refugees in the camps ofThailand, Ma­
laysia, and Hong Kong.
   Now sixty-four years old, yet looking twenty years younger,
Thich Nhat Hanh is emerging as one ofthe great teachers of the
twentieth century. In the midst of our society's emphasis on·
speed, efficiency, and material success, Thich Nhat Hanh's abil­
ity to walk calmly with peace and awareness and to teach us to
do the same has led to his enthusiastic reception in the West. Al­
though his mode ofexpression is simple, his message reveals the
quintessence of the deep understanding of reality that comes
from his meditations, his Buddhist training, and his work in the
world.
   His way of teaching centers around conscious breathing­
the awareness of each breath-and, through conscious breath­
ing, mindfulness of each act of daily life. Meditation, he tells us,
is not just in a meditation hall. It is just as sacred to wash the
dishes mindfully as to bow deeply or light incense. He also tells
us that forming a smile on our face can relax hundreds of mus­
cles in our body-he calls it "mouth yoga"-and in fact, recent
                                 xm


T     H     I   e    H      N     H   A     T      H    A    N    H
studies have shown that when we flex our facial muscles into
expressions of joy, we do indeed produce the effects on our ner­
vous system that go with real joy. Peace and happiness are avail­
able, he reminds us, ifwe can only quiet our distracted thinking
long enough to come back to the present moment and notice the
blue sky, the child's smile, the beautiful sunrise. "Ifwe are peace­
ful, if we are happy, we can smile, and everyone in our family, our
entire society, will benefit from our peace."
   Peace Is Every Step is a book of reminders. In the rush of mod­
ern life, we tend to lose touch with the peace that is available in
each moment. Thich Nhat Hanh's creativity lies in his ability to
make use of the very situations that usually pressure and antag-
0nize us. For him, a ringing telephone is a signal to call us back
to our true selves. Dirty dishes, red lights, and traffic jams are
spiritual friends on the path ofmindfulness. The most profound
satisfactions, the deepest feelings of joy and completeness lie as
close at hand as our next aware breath and the smile we can form
right now.
    Peace Is Every Step was assembled from Thich Nhat Hanh's
lectures, published and unpublished writings, and informal
conversations, by a small group offriends-Therese Fitzgerald,
Michael Katz, Jane Hirshfield, and myself-working closely
with Thay Nhat Hanh (pronounced "tie"-the Vietnamese
word for "teacher") and with Leslie Meredith, our attentive,
thorough, and sensitive editor at Bantam. Patricia Curtan pro­
 vided the beautiful dandelion. Special thanks to Marion Tripp,
 who wrote the "Dandelion Poem."
    This book is the clearest and most complete message yet of a
                                  XIV


P E A C E           I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
great bodhisattva, who has dedicated his life to the enlighten­
ment of others. Thich Nhat Hanh's teaching is simultaneously
inspirational and very practical. I hope the reader enjoys this
book as much as we have enjoyed making it available.
                                                Arnold Kotler
                                                 Thenae, France
                                                July 1990
                              xv


 PEACE IS
EVERY STEP


    P A R T  O N E
Breathe! You Are Alive


                       Twenty-Four
                   Brand-New Hours
Every morning, when we wake up, we have twenty-four brand­
new hours to live. What a precious gift! We have the capacity to
live in a way that these twenty-four hours will bring peace, joy,
and happiness to ourselves and others.
   Peace is present right here and now, in ourselves and in every­
thing we do and see. The question is whether or not we are in
touch with it. We don't have to travel far away to enjoy the blue
sky. We don't have to leave our city or even our neighborhood to
enjoy the eyes of a beautiful child. Even the air we breathe can be
a source of joy.
   We can smile, breathe, walk, and eat our meals in a way that
allows us to be in touch with the abundance of happiness that is
available. We are very good at preparing to live, but not very
good at living. We know how to sacrifice ten years for a diploma,
and we are willing to work very hard to get a job, a car, a house,
and so on. But we have difficulty remembering that we are alive
in the present moment, the only moment there is for us to be
alive. Every breath we take, every step we make, can be filled
with peace, joy, and serenity. We need only to be awake, alive in
the present moment.
   This small book is offered as a bell of mindfulness, a reminder


T     H   I   e     H      N     H    A    T       H   A   N     H
that happiness is possible only in the present moment. Of course,
planning for the future is a part of life. But even planning can
only take place in the present moment. This book is an invitation
to come back to the present moment and find peace and joy. I of­
fer some of my experiences and a number of techniques that
may be of help. But please do not wait until finishing this book
to find peace. Peace and happiness are available in every mo­
ment. Peace is every step. We shall walk hand in hand. Bon
voyage.
                       The Dandelion
                       Has My Smile
If a child smiles, if an adult smiles, that is very important. If in
our daily lives we can smile, if we can be peaceful and happy, not
only we, but everyone will profit from it. If we really know how
to live, what better way to start the day than with a smile? Our
smile affirms our awareness and determination to live in peace
and joy. The source of a true smile is an awakened mind.
    How can you remember to smile when you wake up? You
might hang a reminder-such as a branch, a leaf, a painting, or
some inspiring words-in your window or from the ceiling
                                  6


P E A C E                I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
above your bed, so that you notice it when you wake up. Once
you develop the practice of smiling, you may not need a re­
minder. You will smile as soon as you hear a bird singing or see
the sunlight streaming through the window. Smiling helps you
approach the day with gentleness and understanding.
    When I see someone smile, I know immediately that he or she
is dwelling in awareness. This half-smile, how many artists have
labored to bring it to the lips of countless statues and paintings?
I am sure the same smile must have been on the faces of the
sculptors and painters as they worked. Can you imagine an an­
gry painter giving birth to su�h a smile? Mona Lisa's smile is
light, just a hint of a smile. Yet even a smile like that is enough to
relax all the muscles in our face, to banish all worries and fatigue.
A tiny bud of a smile on our lips nourishes awareness and calms
us miraculously. It returns to us the peace we thought we had
lost.
    Our smile will bring happiness to us and to those around us.
Even if we spend a lot of money on gifts for everyone in our fam­
ily, nothing we buy could give them as much happiness as the gift
of our awareness, our smile. And this precious gift costs nothing.
At the end of a retreat in California, a friend wrote this poem:
                          I have lost my smile,
                          but don't worry.
                          The dandelion has it.
    If you have lost your smile and yet are still capable of seeing
that a dandelion is keeping it for you, the situation is not too bad.
You still have enough mindfulness to see that the smile is there.
                                     7


T    H     I   e    H      N    H    A    T      H   A    N    H
You only need to bre�the consciously one or two times and you
will recover your smile. The dandelion is one member of your
community of friends. It is there, quite faithful, keeping your
smile for you.
   In fact, everything around you is keeping your smile for you.
You don't need to feel isolated. You only have to open yourself to
the support that is all around you, and in you. Like the friend
who saw that her smile was being kept by the dandelion, you can
breathe in awareness, and your smile will return.
                  Conscious Breathing
There are a number of breathing techniques you can use to
make life vivid and more enjoyable. The first exercise is very
simple. As you breathe in, you say to yourself, "Breathing in, I
know that I am breathing in." And as you breathe out, say,
"Breathing out, I know that I am breathing out." Just that. You
recognize your in-breath as an in-br�ath and your out-breath as
an out-breath. You don't even need to recite the whole sentence;
you can use just two words: "In" and "Out." This technique can
help you keep your mind on your breath. As you practice, your
breath will become peaceful and gentle, and your mind and
body will also become peaceful and gentle. This is not a difficult
                                  8


P E A C E             I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
exercise. In just a few minutes you can realize the fruit of
meditation.
   Breathing in and out is very important, and it is enjoyable.
Our breathing is the link between our body and our mind.
Sometimes our mind is thinking of one thing and our body is
doing another, and mind and body are not unified. By concen­
trating on our breathing, "In" and "Out," we bring body and
mind back together, and become whole again. Conscious
breathing is an important bridge.
   To me, breathing is a joy that I cannot miss. Every day, I prac­
tice conscious breathing, and in my small meditation room, I
have calligraphed this sentence: "Breathe, you are alive ! " Just
breathing and smiling can make us very happy, because when
we breathe consciously we recover ourselves completely and en­
counter life in the present moment.
                     Present Moment)
                    Wondeiful Moment
In our busy society, it is a great fortune to breathe consciously
from time to time. We can practice conscious breathing not only
while sitting in a meditation room, but also while working at the
                                 9


T     H     I  e     H      N      H   A    T      H    A    N    H
office or at home, while driving our car, or sitting on a bus, wher­
ever we are, at any time throughout the day.
   There are so many exercises we can do to help us breathe con­
sciously. Besides the simple "In-Out" exercise, we can recite
these four lines silently as we breathe in and out:
                 Breathing in, I calm my body.
                 Breathing out, I smile.
                 Dwelling in the present moment,
                 I know this is a wonderful moment!
   "Breathing in, I calm my body." Reciting this line is like
drinking a glass of cool lemonade on a hot day-you can feel the
coolness permeate your body. When I breathe in and recite this
line, I actually feel my breath calming my body and mind.
   "Breathing out, I smile." You know a smile can relax hun­
dreds of muscles in your face. Wearing a smile on your face is a
sign that you are master of yourself.
   "Dwelling in the present moment." While I sit here, I don't
think of anything else. I sit here, and I know exactly where I am.
    "I know this is a wonderful moment." It is a joy to sit, stable
and at ease, and return to our breathing, our smiling, our true
nature. Our appointment with life is in the present moment. If
we do not have peace and joy right now, when will we have peace
and joy-tomorrow, or after tomorrow? What is preventing us
from being happy right now? As we follow our breathing, we
can say, simply, "Calming, Smiling, Present moment, Wonder­
ful moment."
    This exercise is not just for beginners. Many of us who have
                                   10


P E A C E                 I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
practiced meditation and conscious breathing for forty or fifty
years continue to practice in this same way, because this kind of
exercise is so important and so easy.
                           Thinking Less
While we practice conscious breathing, our thinking will slow
down, and we can give ourselves a real rest. Most of the time, we
think too much, and mindful breathing helps us to be calm, re­
laxed, and peaceful. It helps us stop thinking so much and stop
being possessed by sorrows of the past and worries about the fu­
ture. It enables us to be in touch with life, which is wonderful in
the present moment.
   Of course, thinking is important, but quite a lot of our think­
ing is useless. It is as if, in our head, each of us has a cassette tape
that is always running, day and night. We think of this and we
think of that, and it is difficult to stop. With a cassette, we can just
press the stop button. But with our thinking, we do not have any
button. We may think and worry so much that we cannot sleep.
If we go to the doctor for some sleeping pills or tranquilizers,
these may make the situation worse, because we do not really rest
during that kind of sleep, and if we continue using these drugs,
                                     I I


T     H    I   e    H      N     H   A    T      H     A    N   H
we may become addicted. We continue to live tensely, and we
may have nightmares.
   According to the method of conscious breathing, when we
breathe in and out, we stop thinking, because saying "In" and
"Out" is not thinking-"In" and "Out" are only words to help us
concentrate on our breathing. If we keep breathing in and out
this way for a few minutes, we become quite refreshed. We re­
cover ourselves, and we can encounter the beautiful things
around us in the present moment. The past is gone, the future is
not yet here. If we do not go back to ourselves in the present mo­
ment, we cannot be in touch with life.
   When we are in touch with the refreshing, peaceful, and heal­
ing elements within ourselves and around us, we learn how to
cherish and protect these things and make them grow. These
elements of peace are available to us anytime.
                 Nourishing Awareness
                     in Each Moment
One cold, winter evening I returned home from a walk in the
hills, and I found that all the doors and windows in my hermi­
tage had blown open. When I had left earlier, I hadn't secured
                                 12


P E A C E               I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
them, and a cold wind had blown through the house, opened the
windows, and scattered the papers from my desk all over the
room. Immediately, I closed the doors and windows, lit a lamp,
picked up the papers, and arranged them neatly on my desk.
Then I started a fire in the fireplace, and soon the crackling logs
brought warmth back to the room.
    Sometimes in a crowd we feel tired, cold, and lonely. We may
wish to withdraw to be by ourselves and become warm again, as
I did when I closed the windows and sat by the fire, protected
from the damp, cold wind. Our senses are our windows to the
world, and sometimes the wind blows through them and dis­
turbs everything within us. Some of us leave our windows open
all the time, allowing the sights and sounds of the world to in­
vade us, penetrate us, and expose our sad, troubled selves. We
feel so cold, lonely, and afraid. Do you ever find yourself watch­
ing an awful TV program, unable to turn it off? The raucous
noises, explosions of gunfire, are upsetting. Yet you don't get up
and turn it off. Why do you torture yourself in this way? Don't
you want to close your windows? Are you frightened of soli­
tude-the emptiness and the loneliness you may find when you
face yourself alone?
    Watching a bad TV program, we become the TV program.
We are what we feel and perceive. If we are angry, we are the an­
ger. If we are in love, we are love. If we look at a snow-covered
mountain peak, we are the mountain.We can be anything we
want, so why do we open our windows to bad TV programs
made by sensationalist producers in search of easy money, pro­
grams that make our hearts pound, our fists tighten, and leave us


T    H     I   e    H      N     H    A    T       H    A   N     H
exhausted ? Who allows such TV programs to be made and seen
by even the very young? We do ! We are too undemanding, too
ready to watch whatever is on the screen, too lonely, lazy, or
bored to create our own lives. We turn on the TV and leave it on,
allowing someone else to guide us, shape us, and destroy us. Los­
ing ourselves in this way is leaving our fate in the hands of others
who may not be acting responsibly. We must be aware of which
programs do harm to our nervous systems, minds, and hearts,
and which programs benefit us.
   Of course, I am not talking only about television. All around
us, how many lures are set by our fellows and ourselves? In a sin­
gle day, how many times do we become lost and scattered be­
cause of them? We must be very careful to protect our fate and
our peace. I am not suggesting that we just shut all our windows,
for there are many miracles in the world we call "outside." We
can open our windows to these miracles and look at any one of
them with awareness. This way, even while sitting beside a clear,
flowing stream, listening to beautiful music, or watching an ex­
cellent movie, we need not lose ourselves entirely in the stream,
the music, or the film. We can continue to be aware of ourselves
and our breathing. With the sun of awareness shining in us, we
can avoid most dangers. The stream will be purer, the music
more harmonious, and the soul of the filmmaker completely
visible.
   As beginning meditators, we may want to leave the city and
go off to the countryside to help close those windows that trouble
our spirit. There we can become one with the quiet forest, and


P E A C E              I S     E V E R Y              S T E P
rediscover and restore ourselves, without being swept away by
the chaos of the "outside world." The fresh and silent woods
help us remain in awareness, and when our awareness is well­
rooted and we can maintain it without faltering, we may wish to
return to the city and remain there, less troubled. But sometimes
we cannot leave the city, and we have to find the refreshing and
peaceful elements that can heal us right in the midst of our busy
lives. We may wish to visit a good friend who can comfort us, or
go for a walk in a park and enjoy the trees and the cool breeze.
Whether we are in the city, the countryside, or the wilderness, we
need to sustain ourselves by choosing our surroundings carefully
and nourishing our awareness in each moment.
                     Sitting Anywhere
When you need to slow down and come back to yourself, you do
not need to rush home to your meditation cushion or to a med­
itation center in order to practice conscious breathing. You can
breathe anywhere, just sitting on your chair at the office or sitting
in your automobile. Even if you are at a shopping center filled
with people or waiting in line at a bank, if you begin to feel de-


T    H     I    e    H      N     H    A   T        H     A  N    H
pleted and need to return to yourself, you can practice conscious
breathing and smiling just standing there.
   Wherever you are, you can breathe mindfully. We all need to
go back to ourselves from time to time, in order to be able to con­
front the difficulties of life. We can do this in any position­
standing, sitting, lying down, or walking. If you can sit down,
however, the sitting position is the most stable.
   One time, I was waiting for a plane that was four hours late at
Kennedy Airport in New York, and I enjoyed sitting cross­
legged right in the waiting area. I just rolled up my sweater and
used it as a cushion, and I sat. People looked at me curiously, but
after a while they ignored me, and I sat in peace. There was no
place to rest, the airport was full of people, so I just made myself
comfortable where I was. You may not want to meditate so con­
spicuously, but breathing mindfully in any position at any time
can help you recover yourself.
                      Sitting Meditation
The most stable posture for meditation is sitting cross-legged on
a cushion. Choose a cushion that is the right thickness to support
you. The half-lotus and full-lotus positions are excellent for es­
tablishing stability of body and mind. To sit in the lotus position,


P E A C E                I S        E V E R Y               S T E P
gently cross your legs by placing one foot (for the half-lotus) or
both feet (for the full-lotus) on the opposite thighs. If the lotus
position is difficult, it is fine just to sit cross-legged or in any com­
fortable position. Allow your back to be straight, keep your eyes
half closed, and fold your hands comfortably on your lap. If you
prefer, you can sit in a chair with your feet flat on the floor and
your hands resting on your lap. Or you can lie on the floor, on
your back, with your legs straight out, a few inches apart, and
your arms at your sides, preferably palms up.
   If your legs or feet fall asleep or begin to hurt during sitting
meditation so that your concentration becomes disturbed, feel
free to adjust your position. If you do this slowly and attentively,
following your breathing and each movement of your body, you
will not lose a single moment of concentration. If the pain is se­
vere, stand up, walk slowly and mindfully, and when you are
ready, sit down again.
   In some meditation centers, practitioners are not permitted to
move during periods of sitting meditation. They often have to
endure great discomfort. To me, this seems unnatural. When a
part of our body is numb or in pain, it is telling us something, and
we should listen to it. We sit in meditation to help us cultivate
peace, joy, and nonviolence, not to endure physical strain or to
injure our bodies. To change the position of our feet or do a little
walking meditation will not disturb others very much, and it can
help us a lot.
   Sometimes, we can use meditation as a way of hiding from
ourselves and from life, like a rabbit going back to his hole.
Doing this, we may be able to avoid some problems for a while,
                                      17


T    H     I   e     H    N     H    A    T     H    A    N    H
but when we leave our "hole," we will have to confront them
again. For example, if we practice our meditation very intensely,
we may feel a kind of relief as we exhaust ourselves and divert
our energy from confronting our difficulties. But when our en­
ergy returns, our problems will return with them.
   We need to practice meditation gently, but steadily, through­
out daily life, not wasting a single opportunity or event to see
deeply into the true nature oflife, including our everyday prob­
lems. Practicing in this way, we dwell in profound communion
with life.
                   Bells of Minijulness
In my tradition, we use the temple bells to remind us to come
back to the present moment. Every time we hear the bell, we stop
talking, stop our thinking, and return to ourselves, breathing in
and out, and smiling. Whatever we are doing, we pause for a mo­
ment and just enjoy our breathing. Sometimes we also recite this
verse:
       Listen, listen.
       This wonderful sound brings me back to my true self.
                                18


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
When we breathe in, we say, "Listen, listen," and when we
breathe out, we say, "This wonderful sound brings me back to
my true self."
   Since I have come to the West, I have not heard many Bud­
dhist temple bells. But fortunately, there are church bells all over
Europe. There do not seem to be as many in the United States; I
think that is a pity. Whenever I give a lecture in Switzerland, I
always make use of the church bells to practice mindfulness.
When the bell rings, I stop talking, and all of us listen to the full
sound of the bell. We enjoy it so much. (I think it is better than
the lecture !) When we hear the bell, we can pause and enjoy our
breathing and get in touch with the wonders of life that are
around us-the flowers, the children, the beautiful sounds.
Every time we get back in touch with ourselves, the conditions
become favorable for us to encounter life in the present moment.
   One day in Berkeley, I proposed to professors and students at
the University of California that every time the bell on the cam­
pus sounds, the professors and students should pause in order to
breathe consciously. Everyone should take the time to enjoy
being alive! We should not just be rushing around all day. We
have to learn to really enjoy our church bells and our school bells.
Bells are beautiful, and they can wake us up.
   If you have a bell at home, you can practice breathing and
smiling with its lovely sound. But you do not have to carry a bell
into your office or factory. You can use any sound to remind you
to pause, breathe in and out, and enjoy the present moment. The
buzzer that goes off when you forget to fasten the seat belt in


T     H     I   e     H      N   H      A   T      H    A     N     H
your car is a bell of mindfulness. Even non-sounds, such as the
rays of sunlight coming through the window, are bells of mind­
fulness that can remind us to return to ourselves, breathe, smile,
and live fully in the present moment.
                    Cookie oj Childhood
When I was four years old, my mother used to bring me a cookie
every time she came home from the market. I always went to the
front yard and took my time eating it, sometimes half an hour or
forty-five minutes for one cookie. I would take a small bite and
look up at the sky. Then I would touch the dog with my feet and
take another small bite. I just enjoyed being there, with the sky,
the earth, the bamboo thickets, the cat, the dog, the flowers. I was
able to do that because I did not have much to worry about. I did
not think of the future, I did not regret the past. I was entirely in
the present moment, with my cookie, the dog, the bamboo
thickets, the cat, and everything.
   It is possible to eat our meals as slowly and joyfully as I ate the
cookie of my childhood. Maybe you have the impression that
you have lost the cookie of your childhood, but I am sure it is still
there, somewhere in your heart. Everything is still there, and if
you really want it, you can find it. Eating mindfully is a most im-
                                  20


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
portant practice of meditation. We can eat in a way that we re­
store the cookie of our childhood. The present moment is filled
with joy and happiness. If you are attentive, you will see it.
                   Tangerine Meditation
If I offer you a freshly picked tangerine to enjoy, I think the de­
gree to which you enjoy it will depend on your mindfulness. If
you are free of worries and anxiety, you will enjoy it more. If you
are possessed by anger or fear, the tangerine may not be very real
to you.
   One day, I offered a number of children a basket filled with
tangerines. The basket was passed around, and each child took
one tangerine and put it in his or her palm. We each looked at our
tangerine, and the children were invited to meditate on its
origins. They saw not only their tangerine, but also its mother,
the tangerine tree. With some guidance, they began to visualize
the blossoms in the sunshine and in the rain. Then they saw pet­
als falling down and the tiny green fruit appear. The sunshine
and the rain continued, and the tiny tangerine grew. Now some­
one has picked it, and the tangerine is here. After seeing this, each
child was invited to peel the tangerine slowly, noticing the mist
and the fragrance of the tangerine, and then bring it up to his or
                                 21


T     H    I   e     H      N     H    A    T      H    A    N     H
her mouth and have a mindful bite, in full awareness of the tex­
ture and taste of the fruit and the juice coming out. We ate slowly
like that.
   Each time you look at a tangerine, you can see deeply into it.
You can see everything in the universe in one tangerine. When
you peel it and smell it, it's wonderful. You can take your time
eating a tangerine and be very happy.
                         The Eucharist
The practice of the Eucharist is a practice of awareness. When
Jesus broke the bread and shared it with his disciples, he said,
"Eat this. This is my flesh." He knew that if his disciples would
eat one piece of bread in mindfulness, they would have real life.
In their daily lives, they may have eaten their bread in forgetful­
ness, so the bread was not bread at all; it was a ghost. In our daily
lives, we may. see the people around us, but if we lack mindful­
ness, they are just phantoms, not real people, and we ourselves
are also ghosts. Practicing mindfulness enables us to become
a real person. When we are a real person, we see real people
around us, and life is present in all its richness. The practice of
eating bread, a tangerine, or a cookie is the same.
   When we breathe, when we are mindful, when we look
                                  22


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
deeply at our food, life becomes real at that very moment. To me,
the rite of the Eucharist is a wonderful practice of mindfulness.
In a drastic way, Jesus tried to wake up his disciples.
                    Eating Minijully
A few years ago, I asked some children, "What is the purpose of
eating breakfast? " One boy replied, "To get energy for the day."
Another said, "The purpose of eating breakfast is to eat break­
fast." I think the second child is more correct. The purpose of
eating is to eat.
   Eating a meal in mindfulness is an important practice. We
turn off the TV, put down our newspaper, and work together for
five or ten minutes, setting the table and finishing whatever
needs to be done. During these few minutes, we can be very
happy. When the food is on the table and everyone is seated, we
practice breathing: "Breathing in, I calm my body. Breathing
out, I smile," three times. We can recover ourselves completely
after three breaths like this.
   Then, we look at each person as we breathe in and out in order
to be in touch with ourselves and everyone at the table. We don't
need two hours to see another person. If we are really settled
within ourselves, we only need to look for one or two seconds,
                                 23


T     H    I   e    H      N     H    A   T      H    A     N   H
and that is enough to see. I think that if a family has five mem­
bers, only about five or ten seconds are needed to practice this
"looking and seeing."
   After breathing, we smile. Sitting at the table with other
people, we have a chance tooff"er an authentic smile of friendship
and understanding. It is very easy, but not many people do it. To
me, this is the most important practice. We look at each person
and smile at him or her. Breathing and smiling together is a very
important practice. If the people in a household cannot smile at
each other, the situation is very dangerous.
   After breathing and smiling, we look down at the food in a
way that allows the food to become real. This food reveals our
connection with the earth. Each bite contains the life of the sun
and the earth. The extent to which our food reveals itself de­
pends on us. We can see and taste the whole universe in a piece
of bread ! Contemplating our food for a few seconds before eat­
ing, and eating in mindfulness, can bring us much happiness.
   Having the opportunity to sit with our family and friends and
enjoy wonderful food is something precious, something not
everyone has. Many people in the world are hungry. When I
hold a bowl of rice or a piece of bread, I know that I am fortu­
nate, and I feel compassion for all those who have no food to eat
and are without friends or family. This is a very deep practice.
We do not need to go to a temple or a church in order to practice
this. We can practice it right at our dinner table. Mindful eating
can cultivate seeds of compassion and understanding that will
strengthen us to do something to help hungry and lonely people
be nourished.


P E A C E               I S      E V E R Y               S T E P
    In order to aid mindfulness during meals, you may like to eat
silently from time to time. Your first silent meal may cause you
to feel a little uncomfortable, but once you become used to it, you
will realize that meals in silence bring much peace and happi­
ness. Just as we turn off the TV before eating, we can "turn off"
the talking in order to enjoy the food and the presence of one
another.
    I do not recommend silent meals every day. Talking to each
other can be a wonderful way to be together in mindfulness. But
we have to distinguish among different kinds of talk. Some sub­
jects can separate us: for instance, if we talk about other people's
shortcomings. The carefully prepared food will have no value if
we let this kind of talk dominate our meal. When instead we
speak about things that nourish our awareness of the food and
our being together, we cultivate the kind of happiness that is
necessary for us to grow. If we compare this experience with the
experience of talking about other people's shortcomings, we will
realize that the awareness of the piece of bread in our mouth is
much more nourishing. It brings life in and makes life real.
    So, while eating, we should refrain from discussing subjects
that can destroy our awareness of our family and the food. But
we should feel free to say things that can nourish awareness and
happiness. For instance, if there is a dish that you like very much,
you can notice if other people are also enjoying it, and if one of
them is not, you can help him or her appreciate the wonderful
dish prepared with loving care. If someone is thinking about
something other than the good food on the table, such as his dif­
ficulties in the office or with friends, he is losing the present mo-
                                   25


T    H    I     e   H      N     H    A   T      H     A    N     H
ment and the food. You can say, "This dish is wonderful, don't
you agree? " to draw him out of his thinking and worries and
bring him back to the here and now, enjoying you, enjoying the
wonderful dish. You become a bodhisattva, helping a living being
become enlightened. Children, in particular, are very capable of
practicing mindfulness and reminding others to do the same.
                       Washing Dishes
To my mind, the idea that doing dishes is unpleasant can occur
only when you aren't doing them. Once you are standing in front
of the sink with your sleeves rolled up and your hands in the
warm water, it is really quite pleasant. I enjoy taking my time
with each dish, being fully aware of the dish, the water, and each
movement of my hands. I know that if I hurry in order to eat
dessert sooner, the time of washing dishes will be unpleasant and
not worth living. That would be a pity, for each minute, each sec­
ond of life is a miracle. The dishes themselves and the fact that I
am here washing them are miracles !
   If I am incapable of washing dishes joyfully, if I want to finish
them quickly so I can go and have dessert, I will be equally in­
capable of enjoying my dessert. With the fork in my hand, I will
be thinking about what to do next, and the texture and the flavor
                                 26


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
of the dessert, together with the pleasure of eating it, will be lost.
I will always be dragged into the future, never able to live in the
present moment.
    Each thought, each action in the sunlight of awareness be­
comes sacred. In this light, no boundary exists between the sa­
cred and the profane. I must confess it takes me a bit longer to do
the dishes, but I live fully in every moment, and I am happy.
Washing the dishes is at the same time a means and an end-that
is, not only do we do the dishes in order to have clean dishes, we
also do the dishes just to do the dishes, to live fully in each mo­
ment while washing them.
                   Walking Meditation
Walking meditation can be very enjoyable. We walk slowly,
alone or with friends, if possible in some beautiful place. Walk­
ing meditation is really to enjoy the walking-walking not in
order to arrive, but just to walk. The purpose is to be in the pres­
ent moment and, aware of our breathing and our walking, to en­
joy each step. Therefore we have to shake off all worries and anx­
ieties, not thinking of the future, not thinking of the past, just
enjoying the present moment. We can take the hand of a child as
                                 27


T     H     I  e    H      N     H    A    T       H  A    N     H
we do it. We walk, we make steps as if we are the happiest person
on Earth.
   Although we walk all the time, our walking is usually more
like running. When we walk like that, we print anxiety and sor­
row on the Earth. We have to walk in a way that we only print
peace and serenity on the Earth. We can all do this, provided that
we want it very much. Any child can do it. If we can take one step
like this, we can take two, three, four, and five. When we are able
to take one step peacefully and happily, we are working for the
cause of peace and happiness for the whole of humankind.
Walking meditation is a wonderful practice.
   When we do walking meditation outside, we walk a little
slower than our normal pace, and we coordinate our breathing
with our steps. For example, we may take three steps with each
in-breath and three steps with each out-breath. So we can say,
"In, in, in. Out, out, out." "In" is to help us to identify the in­
breath. Every time we call something by its name, we make it
more real, like saying the name of a friend.
   If your lungs want four steps instead of three, please give
them four steps. If they want only two steps, give them two. The
lengths of your in-breath and out-breath do not have to be the
same. For example, you can take three steps with each inhalation
and four with each exhalation. If you feel happy, peaceful, and
joyful while you are walking, you are practicing correctly.
   Be aware of the contact between your feet and the Earth.
Walk as if you are kissing the Earth with your feet. We have
caused a lot of damage to the Earth. Now it is time for us to take
good care of her. We bring our peace and calm to the surface of
                                 28


P EA C E              I S      E V E R Y               S T E P
the Earth and share the lesson of love. We walk in that spirit.
From time to time, when we see something beautiful, we may
want to stop and look at it-a tree, a flower, some children play­
ing. As we look, we continue to follow our breathing, lest we lose
the beautiful flower and get caught up in our thoughts. When
we want to resume walking, we just start again. Each step we
take will create a cool breeze, refreshing our body and mind.
Every step makes a flower bloom under our feet. We can do it
only if we do not think of the future or the past, if we know that
life can only be found in the present moment.
                  Telephone Meditation
The telephone is very convenient, but we can be tyrannized by
it. We may find its ring disturbing or feel interrupted by too
many calls. When we talk on the phone, we may forget that we
are talking on the telephone, wasting precious time (and
money). Often we talk about things that are not that important.
How many times have we received our phone bill and winced at
the amount of it? The telephone bell creates in us a kind of vi­
bration, and maybe some anxiety: "Who is calling? Is it good
news or bad news? " Yet some force in us pulls us to the phone,
and we cannot resist. We are victims of our own telephone.


T     H    I   e     H      N     H     A    T     H    A   N     H
   I recommend that the next time you hear the phone ring, just
stay where you are, breathe in and out consciously, smile to your­
self, and recite this verse: "Listen, listen. This wonderful sound
brings me back to my true self." When the bell rings for the sec­
ond time, you can repeat the verse, and your smile will be even
more solid. When you smile, the muscles of your face relax, and
your tension quickly vanishes. You can afford to practice breath­
ing and smiling like this, because if the person calling has some­
thing important to say, she will certainly wait for at least three
rings. When the phone rings for the third time, you can continue
to practice breathing and smiling, as you walk to the phone
slowly, with all your sovereignty. You are your own master. You
know that you are smiling not only for your own sake, but also
for the sake of the other person. If you are irritated or angry, the
other person will receive your negativity. But because you have
been breathing consciously and smiling, you are dwelling in
mindfulness, and when you pick up the phone, how fortunate
for the person calling you !
    Before making a phone call, you can also breathe in and out
three times, then dial. When you hear the other phone ring, you
know that your friend is practicing breathing and smiling and
will not pick it up until the third ring. So you tell yourself, "She
is breathing, why not me? " You practice breathing in and out,
and she does too.That's very beautiful !
    You don't have to go into a meditation hall to do this wonder­
ful practice of meditation. You can do it in your office and at
home. I don't know how phone operators can practice while so
many phones ring simultaneously. I rely on you to find a way for


P EA C E                I S      E V E R Y            S T E P
operators to practice telephone meditation. But those of us who
are not operators have the right to three breaths. Practicing tele­
phone meditation can counteract stress and depression and
bring mindfulness into our daily lives.
                   Driving Meditation
In Vietnam, forty years ago, I was the first monk to ride a bicycle.
At that time, it was not considered a very "monkish" thing to do.
But today, monks ride motorcycles and drive cars. We have to
keep our meditation practices up to date and respond to the real
situation in the world, so I have written a simple verse you can
recite before starting your car. I hope you find it helpful:
                     Before starting the car,
                     I know where I am�ing.
                     The car and I are one.
                     If the cargoesfast, I gofast.
   Sometimes we don't really need to use the car, but because we
want to get away from ourselves, we go for a drive. We feel that
there is a vacuum in us and we don't want to confront it. We don't
like being so busy, but every time we have a spare moment, we are
afraid of being alone with ourselves. We want to escape. Either


T      H     I   e     H       N     H    A     T     H     A   N    H
we turn on the television, pick up the telephone, read a novel, go
out with a friend, or take the car and go somewhere. Our civili­
zation teaches us to act this way and provides us with many
things we can use to lose touch with ourselves. If we recite this
poem as we are about to turn the ignition key of our car, it can be
like a torch, and we may see that we don't need to go anywhere.
Wherever we go, our "self" will be with us; we cannot escape. So
it may be better, and more pleasant, to leave the engine off and
go out for a walking meditation.
    It is said that in the last several years, two million square miles
of forest land have been des�royed by acid rain, partly because of
our cars. "Before starting the car, I know where I am going;' is a
very deep question. Where shall we go? To our own destruc­
tion? If the trees die, we humans are going to die also. If the jour­
ney you are making is necessary, please do not hesitate to go. But
if you see that it is not really important, you can remove the key
from the ignition and go instead for a walk along the riverbank
or through a park. You will return to yourself and make friends
with the trees again.
    "The car and I are one." We have the impression that we are
the boss, and the car is only an instrument, but that is not true.
When we use any instrument or machine, we change. A violinist
with his violin becomes very beautiful. A man with a gun be­
comes very dangerous. When we use a car, we are ourselves and
the car.
    Driving is a daily task in this society. I am not suggesting you
stop driving, just that you do so consciously. While we are driv­
ing, we think only about arriving. Therefore, every time we see


P E A C E              I S        E V E R Y             S T E P
a red light, we are not very happy. The red light is a kind of en­
emy that prevents us from attaining our goal. But we can also see
the red light as a bell of mindfulness, reminding us to return to
the present moment. The next time you see a red light, please
smile at it and go back to your breathing. "Breathing in, I calm
my body. Breathing out, 1 smile." It is easy to transform a feeling
of irritation into a pleasant feeling. Although it is the same red
light, it becomes different. It becomes a friend, helping us re­
member that it is only in the present moment that we can live our
lives.
   When 1 was in Montreal several years ago to lead a retreat, a
friend drove me across the city to go to the mountains. 1 noticed
that every time a car stopped in front of me, the sentence "je me
souviens" was on the license plate. It means "I remember." 1 was
not sure what they wanted to remember, perhaps their French
origins, but 1 told my friend that 1 had a gift for him. "Every time
you see a car with that sentence, 'je me souviens; remember to
breathe and smile. It is a bell of mindfulness. You will have
many opportunities to breathe and smile as you drive through
Montreal."
   He was delighted, and he shared the practice with his friends.
Later, when he visited me in France, he told me that it was more
difficult to practice in Paris than in Montreal, because in Paris,
there is no ''je me souviens." 1 told him, "There are red lights and
stop signs everywhere in Paris. Why don't you practice with
them? " After he went back to Montreal, through Paris, he wrote
me a very nice letter: "TM.y, it was very easy to practice in Paris.
Every time a car stopped in front of me, 1 saw the eyes of the
                                   33


T     H    I  e     H      N    H    A    T      H    A    N     H
Buddha blinking at me. I had to answer him by breathing and
smiling, there was no better answer than that. I had a wonderful
time driving in Paris."
    The next time you are caught in a traffic jam, don't fight. It's
useless to fight. Sit back and smile to yourself, a smile of com­
passion and loving kindness. Enjoy the present moment, breath­
ing and smiling, and make the other people in your car happy.
Happiness is there if you know how to breathe and smile, be­
cause happiness can always be found in the present moment.
Practicing meditation is to go back to the present moment in or­
der to encounter the flower, the blue sky, the child. Happiness is
available.
               Decompartmentalizqtion
We have so many compartments in our lives. How can we bring
meditation out of the meditation hall and into the kitchen, and
the office? In the meditation hall we sit quietly, and try to be
aware of each breath. How can our sitting influence our non­
sitting time? When a doctor gives you an injection, not only your
arm but your whole body benefits from it. When you practice
half an hour of sitting meditation a day, that time should be for
all twenty-four hours, and not just for that half-hour. One smile,
                                34


P E A C E               I S     E V E R Y            S T E P
one breath, should be for the benefit of the whole day, not just for
that moment. We must practice in a way that removes the barrier
between practice and non-practice.
   When we walk in the meditation hall, we make careful steps,
very slowly. But when we go to the airport or the supermarket,
we become quite another person. We walk very quickly, less
mindfully. How can we practice mindfulness at the airport and
in the supermarket? I have a friend who breathes between tele­
phone calls, and it helps her very much. Another friend does
walking meditation between business appointments, walking
mindfully between buildings in downtown Denver. Passersby
smile at him, and his meetings, even with difficult persons, often
turn out to be quite pleasant, and very successful.
   We should be able to bring the practice from the meditation
hall into our daily lives. We need to discuss among ourselves how
to do it. Do you practice breathing between phone calls? Do you
practice smiling while cutting carrots ? Do you practice relaxa­
tion after hours of hard work? These are practical questions. If
you know how to apply meditation to dinner time, leisure time,
sleeping time, it will penetrate your daily life, and it will also
have a tremendous effect on social concerns. Mindfulness can
penetrate the activities of everyday life, each minute, each hour
of our daily life, and not just be a description of something far
away.
                                 35


T     H     I   e   H       N    H    A    T     H     A    N     H
                  Breathing and Scy thing
Have you ever cut grass with a scythe? Not many people do these
days. About ten years ago, I brought a scythe home and tried to
cut the grass around my cottage with it. It took more than a week
before I found the best way to use it. The way you stand, the way
you hold the scythe, the angle of the blade on the grass are all im­
portant. I found that if I coordinated the movement of my arms
with the rhythm of my breathing, and worked unhurriedly
while maintaining awareness of my activity, I was able to work
for a longer period of time. When I didn't do this, I became tired
in just ten minutes.
   During the past few years I have avoided tiring myself and
losing my breath. I must take care of my body, treat it with re­
spect as a musician does his instrument. I apply nonviolence to
my body, for it is not merely a tool to accomplish something.
It itself is the end. I treat my scythe in the same way. As I use
it while following my breathing, I feel that my scythe and I
breathe together in rhythm. It is true for many other tools as
well.
   One day an elderly man was visiting my neighbor, and he of­
fered to show me how to use the scythe. He was much more ad­
ept than I, but for the most part he used the same position and
movements. What surprised me was that he too coordinated


P E A C E               I S     E V E R Y               S T E P
his movements with his breathing. Since then, whenever I see
anyone cutting his grass with a scythe, I know he is practicing
awareness.
                          Aimlessness
In the West, we are very goal oriented. We know where we want
to go, and we are very directed in getting there. This may be use­
ful, but often we forget to enjoy ourselves along the route.
    There is a word in Buddhism that means "wishlessness" or
"aimlessness." The idea is that you do not put something in front
of you and run after it, because everything is already here, in
yoursel£ While we practice walking meditation, we do not try to
arrive anywhere. We only make peaceful, happy steps. If we
keep thinking of the future, of what we want to realize, we will
lose our steps. The same is true with sitting meditation. We sit
just to enjoy our sitting; we do not sit in order to attain any goal.
This is quite important. Each moment of sitting meditation
brings us back to life, and we should sit in a way that we enjoy our
sitting for the entire time we do it. Whether we are eating a tan­
gerine, drinking a cup of tea, or walking in meditation, we
should do it in a way that is "aimless."
                                 37


T     H    I    e    H      N     H   A     T       H   A      N     H
    Often we tell ourselves, "Don't just sit there, do something ! "
But when we practice awareness, we discover something un­
usual. We discover that the opposite may be more helpful:
"Don't just do something, sit there ! " We must learn to stop from
time to time in order to see clearly. At first, "stopping" may look
like a kind of resistance to modern life, but it is not. It is not just
a reaction; it is a way of life. Humankind's survival depends on
our ability to stop rushing. We have more than 50,000 nuclear
bombs, and yet we cannot stop making more. "Stopping" is not
only to stop the negative, but to allow positive healing to take
place. That is the purpose of our practice-not to avoid life, but
to experience and demonstrate that happiness in life is possible
now and also in the future.
    The foundation of happiness is mindfulness. The basic con­
dition for being happy is our consciousness of being happy. If we
are not aware that we are happy, we are not really happy. When
we have a toothache, we know that not having a toothache is a
wonderful thing. But when we do not have a toothache, we are
still not happy. A non-toothache is very pleasant. There are so
many things that are enjoyable, but when we don't practice
mindfulness, we don't appreciate them. When we practice
mindfulness, we come to cherish these things and we learn how
to protect them. By taking good care of the present moment, we
take good care of the future. Working for peace in the future is
to work for peace in the present moment.


P E A C E               I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
                          Our Life Is
                         a Work of Art
After a retreat in southern California, an artist asked me, "What
is the way to look at a flower so that I can make the most of it for
my art ? " I said, "If you loo� in that way, you cannot be in touch
with the flower. Abandon all your projects so you can be with the
flower with no intention of exploiting it or getting something
from it." The same artist told me, "When I am with a friend, I
want to profit from him or her." Of course we can profit from a
friend, but a friend is more than a source of profit. Just to be with
a friend, without thinking to ask for his or her support, help, or
advice, is an art.
    I t has become a kind of habit to look at things with the inten­
tion of getting something. We call it "pragmatism," and we say
that the truth is something that pays. If we meditate in order to
get to the truth, it seems we will be well paid. In meditation, we
stop, and we look deeply. We stop just to be there, to be with our­
selves and with the world. When we are capable of stopping, we
begin to see and, if we can see, we understand. Peace and hap­
piness are the fruit of this process. We should master the art of
stopping in order to really be with our friend and with the
flower.
    How can we bring elements of peace to a society that is very
                                  39


T     H    I    e    H      N    H    A      T     H    A     N    H
used to making profit? How can our smile be the source of joy
and not just a diplomatic maneuver? When we smile to our­
selves, that smile is not diplomacy; it is the proof that we are our­
selves, that we have full sovereignty over ourselves. Can we write
a poem on stopping, aimlessness, or just being? Can we paint
something about it? Everything we do is an act of poetry or a
painting if we do it with mindfulness. Growing lettuce is poetry.
Walking to the supermarket can be a painting.
    When we do not trouble ourselves about whether or not
something is a work of art, if we just act in each moment with
composure and mindfulness, each minute of our life is a work of
art. Even when we are not painting or writing, we are still cre­
ating. We are pregnant with beauty, joy, and peace, and we are
making life more beautiful for many people. Sometimes it is bet­
ter not to talk about art by using the word "art." If we just act
with awareness and integrity, our art will flower, and we don't
have to talk about it at all. When we know how to be peace, we
find that art is a wonderful way to share our peacefulness. Artis­
tic expression will take place in one way or another, but the being
is essential. So we must go back to ourselves, and when we have
joy and peace in ourselves, our creations of art will be quite nat­
ural, and they will serve the world in a positive way.


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
                   Hope as an Obstacle
Hope is important, because it can make the present moment less
difficult to bear. If we believe that tomorrow will be better, we
can bear a hardship today. But that is the most that hope can do
for us-to make some hardship lighter. When I think deeply
about the nature of hope, I see something tragic. Since we cling
to our hope in the future, we do not focus our energies and ca­
pabilities on the present moment. We use hope to believe some­
thing better will happen in the future, that we will arrive at
peace, or the Kingdom of God. Hope becomes a kind of obsta­
cle. If you can refrain from hoping, you can bring yourself en­
tirely into the present moment and discover the joy that is al­
ready here.
   Enlightenment, peace, and joy will not be granted by some­
one else. The well is within us, and if we dig deeply in the present
moment, the water will spring forth. We must go back to the
present moment in order to be really alive. When we practice
conscious breathing, we practice going back to the present mo­
ment where everything is happening.
   Western civilization places so much emphasis on the idea of
hope that we sacrifice the present moment. Hope is for the fu­
ture. It cannot help us discover joy, peace, or enlightenment in
the present moment. Many religions are based on the notion of
hope, and this teaching about refraining from hope may create


T     H    I   e    H      N    H    A   T       H    A   N    H
a strong reaction. But the shock can bring about something im­
portant. I do not mean that you should not have hope, but that
hope is not enough. Hope can create an obstacle for you, and if
you dwell in the energy of hope, you will not bring yourself back
entirely into the present moment. If you re-channel those ener­
gies into being aware of what is going on in the present moment,
you will be able to make a breakthrough and discover joy and
peace right in the present moment, inside of yourself and all
around you.
    A. J. Muste, the mid-twentieth-century leader of the peace
movement in America who inspired millions of people, said,
"There is no way to peace, peace is the way." This means that we
can realize peace right in the present moment with our look, our
smile, our words, and our actions. Peace work is not a means.
Each step we make should be peace. Each step we make should
be joy. Each step we make should be happiness. If we are deter­
mined, we can do it. We don't need the future. We can smile and
relax. Everything we want is right here in the present moment.
                      Flower Insights
There is a story about a flower which is well known in the Zen
circles. One day the Buddha held up a flower in front of an au-


P E A C E             I S        E V E R Y             S T E P
dience of 1 ,250 monks and nuns. He did not say anything for
quite a long time. The audience was perfectly silent. Everyone
seemed to be thinking hard, trying to see the meaning behind
the Buddha's gesture. Then, suddenly, the Buddha smiled. He
smiled because someone in the audience smiled at him and at the
flower. The name of that monk was Mahakashyapa. He was the
only person who smiled, and the Buddha smiled back and said,
"I have a treasure of insight, and I have transmitted it to Maha­
kashyapa." That story has been discussed by many generations
of Zen students, and people continue to look for its meaning. To
me the meaning is quite simple. When someone holds up a
flower and shows it to you, he wants you to see it. If you keep
thinking, you miss the flower. The person who was not thinking,
who was just himself, was able to encounter the flower in depth,
and he smiled.
   That is the problem of life. If we are not fully ourselves, truly
in the present moment, we miss everything. When a child pre­
sents himself to you with his smile, if you are not really there­
thinking about the future or the past, or preoccupied with other
problems-then the child is not really there for you. The tech­
nique of being alive is to go back to yourself in order for the child
to appear like a marvelous reality. Then you can see him smile
and you can embrace him in your arms.
   I would like to share a poem with you, written by a friend of
mine who died at the age of twenty-eight in Saigon, about thirty
years ago. After he died, people found many beautiful poems he
had written, and I was startled when I read this poem. It has just
a few short lines, but it is very beautiful:
                                   43


T     H     I   e    H      N      H   A    T       H    A  N     H
                Standing quietly by thefence,
                you smile your wondrous smile.
                I am speechless, and my senses arefilled
                by the sounds ofyour beautiful song,
                beginningless and endless.
                I bow deeply to you.
   "You" refers to a flower, a dahlia. That morning as he passed
by a fence, he saw that little flower very deeply and, struck by the
sight of it, he stopped and wrote that poem.
   I enjoy this poem very much. You might think that the poet
was a mystic, because his way of looking and seeing things is
very deep. But he was just an ordinary person like any one of us.
I don't know how or why he was able to look and see like that,
but it is exactly the way we practice mindfulness. We try to be in
touch with life and look deeply as we drink our tea, walk, sit
down, or arrange flowers. The secret of the success is that you are
really yourself, and when you are really yourself, you can en­
counter life in the present moment.
                                   44


P E A C E               I S      E V E RY              S T E P
                       13reathing �OOfin
We have a room for everything-eating, sleeping, watching
TV-but we have no room for mindfulness. I recommend that
we set up a small room in our homes and call it a "breathing
room," where we can be alone and practice just breathing and
smiling, at least in difficult moments. That little room should be
regarded as an Embassy of the Kingdom of Peace. It should be
respected, and not violated by anger, shouting, or things like
that. When a child is about to be shouted at, she can take refuge
in that room. Neither the father nor the mother can shout at her
anymore. She is safe within the grounds of the Embassy. Parents
sometimes will need to take refuge in that room, also, to sit
down, breathe, smile, and restore themselves. Therefore, that
room is for the benefit of the whole family.
   I suggest that the breathing room be decorated very simply,
and not be too bright. You may want to have a small bell, one
with a beautiful sound, a few cushions or chairs, and perhaps a
vase of flowers to remind us of our true nature. You or your chil­
dren can arrange flowers in mindfulness, smiling. Every time
you feel a little upset, you know that the best thing to do is to go
to that room, open the door slowly, sit down, invite the bell to
sound-in my country we don't say "strike" or "hit" a bell-and
begin to breathe. The bell will help not only the person in the
breathing room, but the others in the house as well.
                                 45


T    H     I   e    H      N    H     A    T     H     A   N    H
   Suppose your husband is irritated. Since he has learned the
practice of breathing, he knows that the best thing is to go into
that room, sit down, and practice. You may not realize where he
has gone; you were busy cutting carrots in the kitchen. But you
suffer also, because you and he just had some kind of altercation.
You are cutting the carrots a bit 'Strongly, because the energy of
the anger is translated into the movement. Suddenly, you hear
the bell, and you know what to do. You stop cutting and you
breathe in and out. You feel better, and you may smile, thinking
about your husband, who knows what to do when he gets angry.
He is now sitting in the breathing room, breathing and smiling.
That's wonderful; not many people do that. Suddenly, a feeling
of tenderness arises, and you feel much better. After three
breaths, you begin to cut the carrots again, but this time, quite
differently.
   Your child, who was witnessing the scene, knew that a kind
of tempest was going to break. She withdrew to her room, closed
the door, and silently waited. But instead of a storm, she heard
the bell, and she understood what was going on. She feels so re­
lieved, and she wants to show her appreciation to her father. She
goes slowly to the breathing room, opens the door, and quietly
enters and sits down beside him to show her support. That helps
him very much. He already felt ready to go out-he is able to
smile now-but since his daughter is sitting there, he wants to
sound the bell again for his daughter to breathe.
   In the kitchen, you hear the second bell and you know that
cutting carrots may not be the best thing to do now. So, you put
down your knife and go into the breathing room. Your husband


P E A C E               I S     E V E R Y             S T E P
is aware that the door is opening and you are coming in. So, al­
though he is now all right, since you are coming, he stays on for
some time longer and sounds the bell for you to breathe. This is
a beautiful scene. If you are very wealthy, you can buy a precious
painting by van Gogh and hang it in your living room. But it will
be less beautiful than this scene in the breathing room. The prac­
tice of peace and reconciliation is one of the most vital and artis­
tic of human actions.
    I know of families where children go into a breathing room
after breakfast, sit down, and breathe, "in-out-one," "in-out­
two," "in-out-three," and so on up to ten, and then they go to
school. If your child doesn't wish to breathe ten times, perhaps
three times is enough. Beginning the day this way is very beau­
tiful and very helpful to the whole family. If you are mindful in
the morning and try to nourish mindfulness throughout the day,
you may be able to come home at the end of a day with a smile,
which proves that mindfulness is still there.
    I believe that every home should have one room for breathing.
Simple practices like conscious breathing and smiling are very
important. They can change our civilization.
                                  47


T    H    I   e    H      N    H     A  T      H    A    N    H
                Continuing the Journ ey
We have walked together in mindfulness, learning how to
breathe and smile in full awareness, at home, at work, and
throughout the day. We have discussed eating mindfully, wash­
ing the dishes, driving, answering the telephone, and even cut­
ting the grass with a scythe. Mindfulness is the foundation of a
happy life.
   But how can we deal with difficult emotions? What should
we do when we feel anger, hatred, remorse, or sadness? There
are many practices I have learned and a number I have discov­
ered during the past forty years for working with these kinds of
mental states. Shall we continue our journey together and try
some of these practices?


       P A R T T W O
Traniformation and Healing


                  The River oj Feelings
Our feelings play a very important part in directing all of our
thoughts and actions. In us, there is a river of feelings, in which
every drop of water is a different feeling, and each feeling relies
on all the others for its existence. To observe it, we just sit on the
bank of the river and identify each feeling as it surfaces, flows by,
and disappears.
   There are three sorts of feelings-pleasant, unpleasant, and
neutral. When we have an unpleasant feeling, we may want to
chase it away. But it is more effective to return to our conscious
breathing and just observe it, identifying it silently to ourselves:
"Breathing in, I know there is an unpleasant feeling in me.
Breathing out, I know there is an unpleasant feeling in me."
Calling a feeling by its name, such as "anger," "sorrow," "joy," or
"happiness," helps us identify it clearly and recognize it more
deeply.
   We can use our breathing to be in contact with our feelings
and accept them. If our breathing is light and calm-a natural
result of conscious breathing-our mind and body will slowly
become light, calm, and clear, and our feelings also. Mindful ob­
servation is based on the principle of "non-duality": our feeling
is not separate from us or caused merely by something outside
us; our feeling is us, and for the moment weare that feeling. We


T     H     I  e     H      N    H    A    T       H    A    N    H
are neither drowned in nor terrorized by the feeling, nor do we
reject it. Our attitude of not clinging to or rejecting our feelings
is the attitude of letting go, an important part of meditation
practice.
    If we face our unpleasant feelings with care, affection, and
nonviolence, we can transform them into the kind of energy that
is healthy and has the capacity to nourish us. By the work of
mindful observation, our unpleasant feelings can illuminate so
much for us, offering us insight and understanding into our­
selves and society.
                        Non-Surgery
Western medicine emphasizes surgery too much. Doctors want
to take out the things that are not wanted. When we have some­
thing irregular in our body, too often they advise us to have an
operation. The same seems to be true in psychotherapy. Thera­
pists want to help us throw out what is unwanted and keep only
what is wanted. But what is left may not be very much. If we try
to throw away what we don't want, we may throw away most of
ourselves.
    Instead of acting as if we can dispose of parts of ourselves, we
                                  52


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
should learn the art of transformation. We can transform our
anger, for example, into something more wholesome, like un­
derstanding. We do not need surgery to remove our anger. If we
become angry at our anger, we will have two angers at the same
time. We only have to observe it with love and attention. If we
take care of our anger in this way, without trying to run away
from it, it will transform itself. This is peacemaking. If we are
peaceful in ourselves, we can make peace with our anger. We can
deal with depression, anxiety, fear, or any unpleasant feeling in
the same way.
                   Traniforming Feelings
The first step in dealing with feelings is to recognize each feeling
as it arises. The agent that does this is mindfulness. In the case of
fear, for example, you bring out your mindfulness, look at your
fear, and recognize it as fear. You know that fear springs from
yourself and that mindfulness also springs from yourself. They
are both in you, not fighting, but one taking care of the other.
    The second step is to become one with the feeling. It is best not
to say, "Go away, Fear. I don'tlike you. You are not me." It is much
more effective to say, "Hello, Fear. How are you today ?" Then
                                  53


T     H    I   e    H       N    H     A    T       H      A    N    H
you can invite the two aspects of yourself, mindfulness and fear,
to shake hands as friends and become one. Doing this may seem
frightening, but because you know that you are more than just
your fear, you need not be afraid. As long as mindfulness is there,
it can chaperone your fear. The fundamental practice is to nour­
ish your mindfulness with conscious breathing, to keep it there,
alive and strong. Although your mindfulness may not be very
powerful in the beginning, if you nourish it, it will become
stronger. As long as mindfulness is present, you will not drown
in your fear. In fact, you begin transforming it the very moment
you give birth to awareness in yourself.
    The third step is to calm the feeling. As mindfulness is taking
good care of your fear, you begin to calm it down. "Breathing in,
I calm the activities of body and mind." You calm your feeling
just by being with it, like a mother tenderly holding her crying
baby. Feeling his mother's tenderness, the baby will calm down
and stop crying. The mother is your mindfulness, born from the
depth of your consciousness, and it will tend the feeling of pain.
A mother holding her baby is one with her baby. If the mother is
thinking of other things, the baby will not calm down. The
mother has to put aside other things and just hold her baby.
So, don't avoid your feeling. Don't say, "You are not important.
You are only a feeling." Come and be one with it. You can say,
"Breathing out, I calm my fear."
    The fourth step is to release the feeling, to let it go. Because of
your calm, you feel at ease, even in the midst of fear, and you
know that your fear will not grow into something that will over-
                                  54


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
whelm you. When you know that you are capable of taking care
of your fear, it is already reduced to the minimum, becoming
softer and not so unpleasant. Now you can smile at it and let it go,
but please do not stop yet. Calming and releasing are just medi­
cines for the symptoms. You now have an opportunity to go
deeper and work on transforming the source of your fear.
   The fifth step is to look deeply. You look deeply into your
baby-your feeling of fear-to see what is wrong, even after the
baby has already stopped crying, after the fear is gone. You can­
not hold your baby all the time, and therefore you have to look
into him to see the cause of what is wrong. By looking, you will
see what will help you begin to transform the feeling. You will
realize, for example, that his suffering has many causes, inside
and outside of his body. If something is wrong around him, if
you put that in order, bringing tenderness and care to the situa­
tion, he will feel better. Looking into your baby, you see the ele­
ments that are causing him to cry, and when you see them, you
will know what to do and what not to do to transform the feeling
and be free.
   This is a process similar to psychotherapy. Together with the
patient, a therapist looks at the nature of the pain. Often, the
therapist can uncover causes of suffering that stem from the way
the patient looks at things, the beliefs he holds about himself, his
culture, and the world. The therapist examines these viewpoints
and beliefs with the patient, and together they help free him
from the kind of prison he has been in. But the patient's efforts
are crucial. A teacher has to give birth to the teacher within his
                                 55


T     H    I    e    H      N    H      A   T      H   A     N     H
student, and a psychotherapist has to give birth to the psycho­
therapist within his patient. The patient's "internal psychother­
apist" can then work full-time in a very effective way.
   The therapist does not treat the patient by simply giving him
another set of beliefs. She tries to help him see which kinds of
ideas and beliefs have led to his suffering. Many patients want to
get rid of their painful feelings, but they do not want to get rid of
their beliefs, the viewpoints that are the very roots of their feel­
ings. So therapist and patient have to work together to help the
patient see things as they are. The same is true when we use
mindfulness to transform our feelings. After recognizing the
feeling, becoming one with it, calming it down, and releasing it,
we can look deeply into its causes, which are often based on in­
accurate perceptions. As soon as we understand the causes and
nature of our feelings, they begin to transform themselves.
                  Mincifulness oj Anger
Anger is an unpleasant feeling. It is like a blazing flame that
burns up our self-control and causes us to say and do things that
we regret later. When someone is angry, we can see clearly that
he or she is abiding in hell. Anger and hatred are the materials


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
from which hell is made. A mind without anger is cool, fresh,
and sane. The absence of anger is the basis of real happiness, the
basis of love and compassion.
   When our anger is placed under the lamp of mindfulness, it
immediately begins to lose some of its destructive nature. We
can say to ourselves, "Breathing in, I know that anger is in me.
Breathing out, I know that I am my anger." If we follow our
breathing closely while we identify and mindfully observe our
anger, it can no longer monopolize our consciousness.
   Awareness can be called upon to be a companion for our an­
ger. Our awareness of our anger does not suppress it or drive it
out. It just looks after it. This is a very important principle.
Mindfulness is not a judge. It is more like an older sister looking
after and comforting her younger sister in an affectionate and
caring way. We can concentrate on our breathing in order to
maintain this mindfulness and know ourselves fully.
   When we are angry, we are not usually inclined to return to
ourselves. We want to think about the person who is making us
angry, to think about his hateful aspects-his rudeness, dis­
honesty, cruelty, maliciousness, and so on. The more we think
about him, listen to him, or look at him, the more our anger
flares. His dishonesty and hatefulness may be real, imaginary,
or exaggerated, but, in fact, the root of the problem is the anger
itself, and we have to come back and look first of all inside
ourselves. It is best if we do not listen to or look at the person
whom we consider to be the cause of our anger. Like a fireman,
we have to pour water on the blaze first and not waste time
                                 57


T     H   I   e     H      N    H     A    T       H   A   N     H
looking for the one who set the house on fire. "Breathing in, I
know that I am angry. Breathing out, I know that I must put all
my energy into caring for my anger." So we avoid thinking
about the other person, and we refrain from doing or saying
anything as long as our anger persists. If we put all our mind
into observing our anger, we will avoid doing any damage that
we may regret later.
   When we are angry, our anger is our very self. To suppress or
chase it away is to suppress or chase away our self. When we are
joyful, we are the joy. When we are angry, we are the anger.
When anger is born in us, we can be aware that anger is an en­
ergy in us, and we can accept that energy in order to transform it
into another kind of energy. When we have a compost bin filled
with organic material which is decomposing and smelly, we
know that we can transform the waste into beautiful flowers. At
first, we may see the compost and the flowers as opposite, but
when we look deeply, we see that the flowers already exist in the
compost, and the compost already exists in the flowers. It only
takes a couple of weeks for a flower to decompose. When a good
organic gardener looks into her compost, she can see that, and
she does not feel sad or disgusted. Instead, she values the rotting
material and does not discriminate against it. It takes only a few
months for compost to give birth to flowers. We need the insight
and non-dual vision of the organic gardener with regard to our
anger. We need not be afraid of it or reject it. We know that anger
can be a kind of compost, and that it is within its power to give
birth to something beautiful. We need anger in the way the
                                 58


P E A C E                I  S     E V E R Y             S    T   E P
organic gardener needs compost. If we know how to accept
our anger, we already have some peace and joy. Gradually we
can transform anger completely into peace, love, and under­
standing.
                      Pillow-Pounding
Expressing anger is not always the best way to deal with it. In ex­
pressing anger we might be practicing or rehearsing it, and
making it stronger in the depth of our consciousness. Expressing
anger to the person we are angry at can cause a lot of damage.
   Some of us may prefer to go into our room, lock the door, and
punch a pillow. We call this "getting in touch with our anger."
But I don't think this is getting in touch with our anger at all. In
fact, I don't think it is even getting in touch with our pillow. If we
are really in touch with the pillow, we know what a pillow is and
we won't hit it. Still, this technique may work temporarily be­
cause while pounding the pillow, we expend a lot ofenergy, and
after a while, we are exhausted and we feel better. But the roots
of our anger are still intact, and if we go out and eat some nour­
ishing food, our energy will be renewed. If the seeds of our anger
                                    59


T      H    I   e   H      N     H    A   T       H   A    N    H
are watered again, our anger will be reborn, and we will have to
pound the pillow again.
   Pillow-pounding may provide some relief, but it is not very
long-lasting. In order to have real transformation, we have to
deal with the roots of our anger-looking deeply into its causes.
If we don't, the seeds of anger will grow again. If we practice
mindful living, planting new, healthy, wholesome seeds, they
will take care of our anger, and they may transform it without
our asking them to do so.
   Our mindfulness will take care of everything, as the sunshine
takes care of the vegetation. The sunshine does not seem to do
much, it just shines on the vegetation, but it transforms every­
thing. Poppies close up every time it gets dark, but when the sun
shines on them for one or two hours, they open. The sun pene­
trates into the flowers, and at some point, the flowers cannot re­
sist, they just have to open up. In the same way, mindfulness, if
practiced continuously, will provide a kind of transformation
within the flower of our anger, and it will open and show us its
own nature. When we understand the nature, the roots, of our
anger, we will be freed from it.
                                  60


P E A C E             I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
                    Walking Meditation
                        When Angry
When anger arises, we may wish to go outside to practice walk­
ing meditation. The fresh air, the green trees, and the plants will
help us greatly. We can practice like this:
    Breathing in, I know that anger is here.
    Breathing out, I know that the anger is me.
    Breathing in, I know that anger is unpleasant.
    Breathing out, I know thisfeeling willpass.
    Breathing in, I am calm.
    Breathing out, I am strong enough to take care ofthis anger.
   To lessen the unpleasant feeling brought about by the anger,
we give our whole heart and mind to the practice of walking
meditation, combining our breath with our steps and giving full
attention to the contact between the soles of our feet and the
earth. As we walk, we recite this verse, and wait until we are calm
enough to look directly at the anger. Until then, we can enjoy our
breathing, our walking, and the beauties of our environment.
After a while, our anger will subside and we will feel stronger.
Then we can begin to observe the anger directly and try to un­
derstand it.


T     H    I   e    H      N     H    A    T      H   A    N     H
                 Cooking Our Potatoes
Thanks to the illuminating light of awareness, after practicing
mindful observation for a while, we begin to see the primary
causes of our anger. Meditation helps us look deeply into things
in order to see their nature. If we look into our anger, we can see
its roots, such as misunderstanding, clumsiness, injustice, re­
sentment, or conditioning. These roots can be present in our­
selves and in the person who played the principal role in precip­
itating our anger. We observe mindfully in order to be able to see
and to understand. Seeing and understanding are the elements
of liberation that bring about love and-compassion. The method
of mindful observation in order to see and understand the roots
of the anger is a method that has lasting effectiveness.
    We cannot eat raw potatoes, but we don't throw them away
just because they are raw. We know we can cook them. So, we
put them into a pot of water, put a lid on, and put the pot on the
fire. The fire is mindfulness, the practice of breathing con­
sciously and focusing on our anger. The lid symbolizes our con­
centration, because it prevents the heat from going out of the
pot. When we are practicing breathing in and out, looking into
our anger, we need some concentration in order for our practice
to be strong. Therefore, we turn away from all distractions and
focus on the problem. If we go out into nature, among the trees
and flowers, the practice is easier.
                                  62


P E A C E              I S       E V E R Y            S T E P
    As soon as we put the pot on the fire, a change occurs. The
water begins to warm up. Ten minutes later, it boils, but we have
to keep the fire going a while longer in order to cook our pota­
toes. As we practice being aware ofour breathing and our anger,
a transformation is already occurring. After half an hour, we lift
the lid and smell something different. We know that we can eat
our potatoes now. Anger has been transformed into another
kind of energy-understanding and compassion.
                   The Roots of Anger
Anger is rooted in our lack of understanding of ourselves and of
the causes, deep-seated as well as immediate, that brought about
this unpleasant state of affairs. Anger is also rooted in desire,
pride, agitation, and suspicion. The primary roots of our anger
are in ourselves. Our environment and other people are only sec­
ondary. It is not difficult for us to accept the enormous damage
brought about by a natural disaster, such as an earthquake or a
flood. But when damage is caused by another person, we don't
have much patience. We know that earthquakes and floods have
causes, and we should see that the person who has precipitated
our anger also has reasons, deep-seated and immediate, for what
he has done.


T     H     I   e     H      N   H     A     T     H     A    N    H
   For instance, someone who speaks badly to us may have been
spoken to in exactly the same way just the day before, or by his
alcoholic father when he was a child. When we see and under­
stand these kinds of causes, we can begin to be free from our an­
ger. I am not saying that someone who viciously attacks us
should not be disciplined. But what is most important is that we
first take care of the seeds of negativity in ourselves. Then if
someone needs to be helped or disciplined, we will do so out of
compassion, not anger and retribution. If we genuinely try to
understand the suffering of another person, we are more likely
to act in a way that will help him overcome his suffering and con­
fusion, and that will help all of us.
                    Internal Fonnations
There is a term in Buddhist psychology that can be translated as
"internal formations," "fetters," or "knots." When we have a sen­
sory input, depending on how we receive it, a knot may be tied
in us. When someone speaks unkindly to us, if we understand
the reason and do not take his or her words to heart, we will not
feel irritated at all, and no knot will be tied. But if we do not un­
derstand why we were spoken to that way and we become irri-


P E A C E               I S      E V E R Y              S T E P
tated, a knot will be tied in us. The absence of clear understand­
ing is the basis for every knot.
   If we practice full awareness, we will be able to recognize in­
ternal formations as soon as they are formed, and we will find
ways to transform them. For example, a wife may hear her hus­
band boasting at a party, and inside herself she feels the forma­
tion of a lack of respect. If she discusses this with her husband,
they may come to a clear understanding, and the knot in her will
be untied easily. Internal formations need our full attention as
soon as they manifest, while they are still weak, so that the work
of transformation is easy.
   If we do not untie our knots when they form, they will grow
tighter and stronger. Our conscious, reasoning mind knows that
negative feelings such as anger, fear, and regret are not wholly
acceptable to ourselves or society, so it finds ways to repress them,
to push them into remote areas of our consciousness in order to
forget them. Because we want to avoid suffering, we create de­
fense mechanisms that deny the existence of these negative feel­
ings and give us the impression we have peace within ourselves.
But our internal formations are always looking for ways to
manifest as destructive images, feelings, thoughts, words, or
behavior.
   The way to deal with unconscious internal formations is, first
of all, to find ways to become aware of them. By practicing
mindful breathing, we may gain access to some of the knots that
are tied inside us. When we are aware of our images, feelings,
thoughts, words, and behavior, we can ask ourselves questions
such as: Why did I feel uncomfortable when I heard him say


T    H     I   e     H     N     H    A    T      H    A    N     H
that? Why did I say that to him? Why do I always think of my
mother when I see that woman? Why didn't I like that character
in the movie? Whom did I hate in the past whom she resembles ?
Observing closely like this can gradually bring the internal for­
mations that are buried in us into the realm of the conscious
mind.
    During sitting meditation, after we have closed the doors and
windows of sensory input, the internal formations buried inside
us sometimes reveal themselves as images, feelings, or thoughts.
We may notice a feeling of anxiety, fear, or unpleasantness whose
cause we cannot understand. So we shine the light of our mind­
fulness on it, and prepare ourselves to see this image, feeling, or
thought, in all its complexity. When it begins to show its face, it
may gather strength and become more intense. We may find it
so strong that it robs us of our peace, joy, and ease, and we may
not want to be in contact with it anymore. We may want to move
our attention to another object of meditation or discontinue the
meditation altogether; we may feel sleepy or say that we prefer
to meditate some other time. In psychology, this is called resis­
tance. We are afraid to bring into our conscious mind the feelings
of pain that are buried in us, because they will make us suffer. But
if we have been practicing breathing and smiling for some time,
we will have developed the capacity to sit still and just observe
our fears. As we keep in contact with our breathing and continue
to smile, we can say, "Hello, Fear. There you are again."
    There are people who practice sitting meditation many hours
a day and never really face their feelings. Some of them say that
feelings are not important, and they prefer to give their attention
                                  66


P E A C E             I S     E V E R Y               S T E P
to metaphysical subjects. I am not suggesting that these other
subjects of meditation are unimportant, but if they are not con­
sidered in relation to our real problems, our meditation is not
really very valuable or helpful.
   If we know how to live every moment in an awakened way,
we will be aware of what is going on in our feelings and percep­
tions in the present moment, and we will not let knots form or
become tighter in our consciousness. And if we know how to ob­
serve our feelings, we can find the roots of long-standing inter­
nal formations and transform them, even those that have be­
come quite strong.
                      Living Together
When we live with another person, to protect each other's hap­
piness, we should help one another transform the internal for­
mations that we produce together. By practicing understanding
and loving speech, we can help each other a great deal. Happi­
ness is no longer an individual matter. If the other person is not
happy, we will not be happy either. To transform the other per­
son's knots will help bring about our own happiness as well. A
wife can create internal formations in her husband, and a hus­
band can do so in his wife, and if they continue to create knots in


T    H      I   e   H       N    H     A    T      H   A    N   H
each other, one day there will be no happiness left. Therefore, as
soon as a knot is created, the wife, for example, should know that
a knot has just been tied in her. She should not overlook it. She
should take the time to observe it and, with her husband's help,
transform it. She might say, "Darling, I think we'd better discuss
a conflict I see growing." This is easy when the states of mind of
husband and wife are still light and not filled with too many
knots.
   The root cause of any internal formation is a lack of under­
standing. If we can see the misunderstanding that was present
during the creation of a knot, we can easily untie it. To practice
mindful observation is to look deeply to be able to see the nature
and causes of something. One important benefit of this kind of
insight is the untying of our knots.
                            Suchness
In Buddhism, the word "suchness" is used to mean "the essence
or particular characteristics of a thing or a person, its true na­
ture." Each person has his or her suchness. If we want to live in
peace and happiness with a person, we have to see the suchness
of that person. Once we see it, we understand him or her, and
                                  68


P E A C E             I S        E V E R Y             S T E P
there will be no trouble. We can live peacefully and happily
together.
   When we bring natural gas into our homes for heating and
cooking, we know the suchness of gas. We know that gas is dan­
gerous-it can kill us if we are not mindful. But we also know
that we need the gas in order to cook, so we do not hesitate to
bring it into our homes. The same is true of electricity. We could
get electrocuted by it, but when we are mindful, it can help us,
and there is no problem, because we know something about the
suchness of electricity. A person is the same. If we do not know
enough about the suchness of that person, we may get ourselves
into trouble. But if we know, then we can enjoy each other very
much and benefit a lot from one another. The key is knowing a
person's suchness. We do not expect a person always to be a
flower. We have to understand his or her garbage as well.
                 Look into Your Hand
I have a friend who is an artist. Before he left Vietnam forty years
ago, his mother held his hand and told him, "Whenever you miss
me, look into your hand, and you will see me immediately."
How penetrating these simple, sincere words !
   Over the years, my friend looked into his hand many times.


T     H    I  e    H       N     H   A   T      H     A    N     H
The presence of his mother is not just genetic. Her spirit, her
hopes, and her life are also in him. When he looks into his hand,
he can see thousands of generations before him and thousands
of generations after him. He can see that he exists not only in the
evolutionary tree branching along the axis of time, but also in the
network of interdependent relations. He told me that he never
feels lonely.
   When my niece came to visit me last summer, I offered her
"Look into Your Hand" as a subject for her meditation. I told her
that every pebble, every leaf, and every butterfly are present in
her hand.
                            Parents
When I think of my mother, I cannot separate her image from
my idea of love, for love was the natural ingredient in the sweet,
soft tones of her voice. On the day I lost my mother, I wrote in
my diary, "The greatest tragedy in my life has just happened."
Even as an adult living away from my mother, her loss left me
feeling as abandoned as a small orphan.
   I know that many friends in the West do not feel the same way
about their parents. I have heard many stories about parents who
have hurt their children so much, planting many seeds of suffer-
                                  70


P E A C E              I S     E V E R Y               S T E P
ing in them. But I believe that the parents did not mean to plant
those seeds. They did not intend to make their children suffer.
Maybe they received the same kind of seeds from their parents.
There is a continuation in the transmission of seeds, and their fa­
ther and mother might have gotten those seeds from their
grandfather and grandmother. Most of us are victims of a kind
of living that is not mindful, and the practice of mindful living,
of meditation, can stop these kinds of suffering and end the
transmission of such sorrow to our children and grandchildren.
We can break the cycle by not allowing these kinds of seeds of
suffering to be transmitted to our children, our friends, or any­
one else.
    A fourteen-year-old boy who practices at Plum Village told
me this story. When he was eleven, he was very angry at his fa­
ther. Every time he fell down and hurt himself, his father would
shout at him. The boy vowed to himself that when he grew up,
he would be different. But last year, his little sister was playing
with other children and she fell off a swing and scraped her
knee. It was bleeding, and the boy became very angry. He
wanted to shout at her, "How stupid ! Why did you do that? " But
he caught himself. Because he had practiced breathing and
mindfulness, he could recognize his anger and he did not act on
it.
    The adults were taking good care of his sister, washing her
wound and putting a band-aid on it, so he walked away slowly
and practiced breathing on his anger. Suddenly he saw that he
was exactly like his father. He told me, "I realized that if I didn't
do something about the anger in me, I would transmit it to my
                                 71


T    H     I  e    H       N      H    A   T     H     A    N    H
children." At the same time, he saw something else. He saw that
his father may have been a victim just like him. The seeds of his
father's anger might have been transmitted by his grandparents.
It was a remarkable insight for a fourteen-year-old boy, but be­
cause he had been practicing mindfulness, he could see like that.
"I told myself to continue practicing in order to transform my
anger into something else." And after a few months, his anger
disappeared. Then he was able to bring the fruit of his practice
back to his father, and he told him that he used to be angry at
him, but now he understood. He said he wished that his father
would practice also, in order to transform his own seeds of anger.
We usually think that parents have to nourish their children, but
sometimes the children can bring enlightenment to the parents
and help transform them.
   When we look at our parents with compassion, often we see
that our parents are only victims who never had the chance to
practice mindfulness. They could not transform the suffering in
themselves. But if we see them with compassionate eyes, we can
offer them joy, peace, and forgiveness. In fact, when we look
deeply, we discover that it is impossible to drop all identity with
our parents.
   Whenever we take a bath or a shower, ifwe look closely at our
body, we will see that it is a gift from our parents and their par­
ents. As we wash each part of our body, we can meditate on the
nature of the body and the nature oflife, asking ourselves, "To
whom does this body belong? Who has given this body to me?
What has been given? " If we meditate in this way, we will dis­
cover that there are three components: the giver, the gift, and the
                                  72


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y               S T E P
one who receives the gift. The giver is our parents; we are the
continuation of our parents and our ancestors. The gift is our
body itself. The one who receives the gift is us. As we continue to
meditate on this, we see clearly that the giver, the gift, and the re­
ceiver are one. All three are present in our body. When we are
deeply in touch with the present moment, we can see that all our
ancestors and all future generations are present in us. Seeing this,
we will know what to do and what not to do-for ourselves, our
ancestors, our children, and their children.
                         Nourishing
                        Healthy Seeds
Consciousness exists on two levels: as seeds and as manifestations
ofthese seeds. Suppose we have a seed ofanger in us. When con­
ditions are favorable, that seed may manifest as a zone of energy
called anger. It is burning, and it makes us suffer a lot. It is very
difficult for us to be joyful at the moment the seed of anger
manifests.
   Every time a seed has an occasion to manifest itself, it pro­
duces new seeds of the same kind. If we are angry for five min­
utes, new seeds of anger are produced and deposited in the soil
                                 73


T    H     I   e    H      N     H    A     T     H     A    N     H
of our unconscious mind during those five minutes. That is why
we have to be careful in selecting the kind of life we lead and the
emotions we express. When I smile, the seeds of smiling and joy
have come up. As long as they manifest, new seeds of smiling
and joy are planted. But if I don't practice smiling for a number
of years, that seed will weaken, and I may not be able to smile
anymore.
   There are many kinds of seeds in us, both good and bad.
Some were planted during our lifetime, and some were trans­
mitted by our parents, our ancestors, and our society. In a tiny
grain of corn, there is the knowledge, transmitted by previous
generations, of how to sprout and how to make leaves, flowers,
and ears of corn. Our body and our mind also have knowledge
that has been transmitted by previous generations. Our ances­
tors and our parents have given us seeds of joy, peace, and hap­
piness, as well as seeds of sorrow, anger, and so on.
   Every time we practice mindful living, we plant healthy seeds
and strengthen the healthy seeds already in us. Healthy seeds
function similarly to antibodies. When a virus enters our blood­
stream, our body reacts and antibodies come and surround it,
take care of it, and transform it. This is true with our psycholog­
ical seeds as well. If we plant wholesome, healing, refreshing
seeds, they will take care ofthe negative seeds, even without our
asking them. To succeed, we need to cultivate a good reserve of
refreshing seeds.
   One day, in the village where I live, we lost a very close friend,
a Frenchman who helped us considerably in setting up Plum
                                 74


P E A C E             I S        E V E R Y            S T E P
Village. He had a heart attack and died during the night. In the
morning we learned of his passing. He was such a gracious per­
son, and he gave us a lot of joy every time we spent a few minutes
with him. We felt that he was joy and peace itself. The morning
we found out about his death, we regretted very much that we
had not spent more time with him.
   That night, I couldn't sleep. The loss of a friend like him was
so painful. But I had to deliver a lecture the next morning, and I
wanted to sleep, so I practiced breathing. It was a cold, winter
night, and I was lying in bed visualizing the beautiful trees in the
yard ofmy hermitage. Years before, I had planted three beautiful
cedars, a variety from the Himalayas. The trees are now very big,
and, during walking meditation, I used to stop and hug these
beautiful cedars, breathing in and out. The cedars always re­
s ponded to my hugging, I am sure of it. So I lay in bed, and just
breathed in and out, becoming the cedars and my breath. I felt
much better, but still I couldn't sleep. Finally I invited into my
consciousness the image of a delightful Vietnamese child
named Little Bamboo. She came to Plum Village when she was
two years old, and she was so cute that everyone wanted to hold
her in their arms, especially the children. They didn't let Little
Bamboo walk on the ground ! Now she is six years old, and hold­
ing her in your arms, you feel very fresh, very wonderful. So I in­
vited her to come up into my consciousness, and I practiced
breathing and smiling on her image. In just a few moments, I fell
soundly asleep.
   Each of us needs a reserve of seeds that are beautiful, healthy,
                                  75


T     H    I    e    H      N     H   A     T      H     A   N   H
and strong enough to help us during difficult moments. Some­
times, because the block of pain in us is so big, even though a
flower is right in front of us, we cannot touch it. At that moment,
we know that we need help. If we have a strong storehouse of
healthy seeds, we can invite several of them to come up and help
us. If you have a friend who is very close to you, who understands
you, if you know that when you sit close to her, even without say­
ing anything, you will feel better, then you can invite her image
up into your consciousness, and the "two" of you can "breathe
together." Doing just this may be a big help in difficult moments.
   But if you have not seen your friend in a long time, her image
may be too weak in your consciousness to come easily to you. If
you know that she is the only person who can help you re­
establish your balance and if your image of her is already too
weak, there is only one thing to do: buy a ticket and go to her, so
that she is with you not as a seed, but as a real person.
    If you go to her, you have to know how to spend the time well,
because your time with her is limited. When you arrive, sit close
to her, and right away you will feel stronger. But you know that
soon you will have to return home, so you have to take the op­
portunity to practice full awareness in each precious moment
while you are there. Your friend can help you re-establish the
balance within you, but that is not enough. You yourself must
become strong inside, in order to feel all right when you are alone
again. That is why, sitting with her or walking with her, you
need to practice mindfulness. If you don't, if you just use her
presence to ameliorate your suffering, the seed of her image will
not become strong enough to sustain you when you return


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y            S T E P
home. We need to practice mindfulness all the time so that we
plant healing, refreshing seeds in ourselves. Then, when we
need them, they will take care of us.
                   What� Not Wrong?
We often ask, "What's wrong? " Doing so, we invite painful
seeds of sorrow to come up and manifest. We feel suffering, an­
ger, and depression, and produce more such seeds. We would be
much happier if we tried to stay in touch with the healthy, joyful
seeds inside of us and around us. We should learn toask, "What's
not wrong? " and be in touch with that. There are so many ele­
ments in the world and within our bodies, feelings, perceptions,
and consciousness that are wholesome, refreshing, and healing.
If we block ourselves, if we stay in the prison of our sorrow, we
will not be in touch with these healing elements.
   Life is filled with many wonders, like the blue sky, the sun­
shine, the eyes of a baby. Our breathing, for example, can be very
enjoyable. I enjoy breathing every day. But many people appre­
ciate the joy of breathing only when they have asthma or a
stuffed-up nose. We don't need to wait until we have asthma to
enjoy our breathing. Awareness of the precious elements of
happiness is itself the practice of right mindfulness. Elements
                                 77


T     H    I    e    H      N    H    A    T      H    A    N    H
like these are within us and all around us. In each second of our
lives we can enjoy them. If we do so, seeds of peace, joy, and hap­
piness will be planted in us, and they will become strong. The se­
cret to happiness is happiness itself. Wherever we are, any time,
we have the capacity to enjoy the sunshine, the presence of each
other, the wonder of our breathing. We don't have to travel any­
where else to do so. We can be in touch with these things right
now.
                   Blaming Never Helps
When you plant lettuce, if it does not grow well, you don't blame
the lettuce. You look into the reasons it is not doing well. It may
need fertilizer, or more water, or less sun. You never blame the
lettuce. Yet if we have problems with our friends or our family,
we blame the other person. But if we know how to take care of
them, they will grow well, like lettuce. Blaming has no positive
effect at all, nor does trying to persuade using reason and argu­
ments. That is my experience. No blame, no reasoning, no ar­
gument, just understanding. If you understand, and you show
that you understand, you can love, and the situation will change.
   One day in Paris, I gave a lecture about not blaming the let­
tuce. After the talk, I was doing walking meditation by myself,


P E A C E               I S     E V E R Y            S T E P
and when I turned the corner ofa building, I overheard an eight­
year-old girl telling her mother, "Mommy, remember to water
me. I am your lettuce." I was so pleased that she had understood
my point completely. Then I heard her mother reply, "Yes, my
daughter, and I am your lettuce also. So please don't forget to
water me too." Mother and daughter practicing together, it was
very beautifuL
                         Understanding
Understanding and love are not two things, but just one. Sup­
pose your son wakes up one morning and sees that it is already
quite late. He decides to wake up his younger sister, to give her
enough time to eat breakfast before going to schooL It happens
that she is grouchy and instead of saying, "Thank you for wak­
ing me up," she says, "Shut up 1 Leave me alone 1" and kicks him.
He will probably get angry, thinking, "I woke her up nicely.
Why did she kick me? " He may want to go to the kitchen and
tell you about it, or even kick her back.
    But then he remembers that during the night his sister
coughed a lot, and he realizes that she must be sick. Maybe she
behaved so meanly because she has a cold. At that moment, he
understands, and he is not angry at all anymore. When you un-
                                 79


T    H     I   e     H      N       H      A    T      H    A    N    H
derstand, you cannot help but love. You cannot get angry. To de­
velop understanding, you have to practice looking at all living
beings with the eyes of compassion. When you understand, you
cannot help but love. And when you love, you naturally act in a
way that can relieve the suffering of people.
                            Real Love
We really have to understand the person we want to love. If our
love is only a will to possess, it is not love. If we only think of our­
selves, if we know only our own needs and ignore the needs of
the other person, we cannot love. We must look deeply in order
to see and understand the needs, aspirations, and suffering of the
person we love. This is the ground of real love. You cannot resist
loving another person when you really understand him or her.
   F rom time to time, sit close to the one you love, hold his or her
hand, and ask, "Darling, do I understand you enough? Or am I
making you suffer? Please tell me so that I can learn to love you
properly. I don't want to make you suffer, and ifI do so because
of my ignorance, please tell me so that I can love you better, so
that you can be happy." If you say this in a voice that communi­
cates your real openness to understand, the other person may cry.
                                     80


P E A C E               I  S    E V E R Y             S  T   E P
That is a good sign, because it means the door of understanding
is opening and everything will be possible again.
    Maybe a father does not have time or is not brave enough to
ask his son such a question. Then the love between them will not
be as full as it could be. We need courage to ask these questions,
but if we don't ask, the more we love, the more we may destroy
the people we are trying to love. True love needs understanding.
With understanding, the one we love will certainly flower.
              Meditation on Compassion
Love is a mind that brings peace, joy, and happiness to another
person. Compassion is a mind that removes the suffering that is
present in the other. We all have the seeds oflove and compassion
in our minds, and we can develop these fine and wonderful
sources of energy. We can nurture the unconditional love that
does not expect anything in return and therefore does not lead to
anxiety and sorrow.
    The essence of love and compassion is understanding, the
ability to recognize the physical, material, and psychological suf­
fering of others, to put ourselves "inside the skin" of the other.
We "go inside" their body, feelings, and mental formations, and
witness for ourselves their suffering. Shallow observation as an
                                 81


T     H    I    e    H      N     H    A    T       H    A    N     H
outsider is not enough to see their suffering. We must become
one with the object of our observation. When we are in contact
with another's suffering, a feeling of compassion is born in us.
Compassion means, literally, "to suffer with."
   We begin by choosing as the object of our meditation some­
one who is undergoing physical or material suffering, someone
who is weak and easily ill, poor or oppressed, or has no protec­
tion. This kind of suffering is easy for us to see. After that, we can
practice being in contact with more subtle forms of suffering.
Sometimes the other person does not seem to be suffering at all,
but we may notice that he has sorrows which have left their
marks in hidden ways. People with more than enough material
comforts also suffer. We look deeply at the person who is the ob­
ject of our meditation on compassion, both during sitting med­
itation and when we are actually in contact with him. We must
allow enough time to be really in deep contact with his suffering.
We continue to observe him until compassion arises and pene­
trates our being.
   When we observe deeply in this way, the fruit of our medi­
tation will naturally transform into some kind of action."We will
not just say, "I love him very much," but instead, "I will do some­
thing so that he will suffer less." The mind of compassion is truly
present when it is effective in removing another person's suffer­
ing. We have to find ways to nourish and express our compas­
sion. When we come into contact with the other person, our
thoughts and actions should express our mind of compassion,
even ifthat person says and does things that are not easy to accept.
We practice in this way until we see clearly that our love is not
                                   82


P E A C E               I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
contingent upon the other person being lovable. Then we can
know that our mind of compassion is firm and authentic. We
ourselves will be more at ease, and the person who has been the
object of our meditation will also benefit eventually. His suffer­
ing will slowly diminish, and his life will gradually be brighter
and more joyful as a result ofour compassion.
   We can also meditate on the suffering of those who cause us
to suffer. Anyone who has made us suffer is undoubtedly suffer­
ing too. We only need to follow our breathing and look deeply,
and naturally we will see his suffering. A part of his difficulties
and sorrows may have been brought about by his parents' lack of
skill when he was still young. But his parents themselves may
have been victims of their parents; the suffering has been trans­
mitted from generation to generation and been reborn in him. If
we see that, we will no longer blame him for making us suffer,
because we know that he is also a victim. To look deeply is to un­
derstand. Once we understand the reasons he has acted badly,
our bitterness towards him will vanish, and we will long for him
to suffer less. We will feel cool and light, and we can smile. We do
not need the other person to be present in order to bring about
reconciliation. When we look deeply, we become reconciled
with oursel ves, and, for us, the problem no longer exists. Sooner
or later, he will see our attitude and will share in the freshness of
the stream of love which is flowing naturally from our heart.


T      H    I   e   H      N     H     A    T      H    A    N    H
                    Meditation on Love
The mind of love brings peace, joy, and happiness to ourselves
and others. Mindful observation is the element which nourishes
the tree of understanding, and compassion and love are the most
beautiful flowers. When we realize the mind of love, we have to
go to the one who has been the object of our mindful observa­
tion, so that our mind of love is not just an object of our imagi­
nation, but a source of energy which has a real effect in the world.
    The meditation on love is not just sitting still and visualizing
that our love will spread out into space like waves of sound or
light. Sound and light have the ability to penetrate everywhere,
and love and compassion can do the same. But if our love is only
a kind of imagination, then it is not likely to have any real effect.
It is in the midst of our daily life and in our actual contact with
others that we can know whether our mind of love is really pres­
ent and how stable it is. If love is real, it will be evident in our
daily life, in the way we relate with people and the world.
    The source of love is deep in us, and we can help others realize
a lot of happiness. One word, one action, or one thought can re­
duce another person's suffering and bring him joy. One word
can give comfort and confidence, destroy doubt, help someone
avoid a mistake, reconcile a conflict, or open the door to libera­
tion. One action can save a person's life or help him take advan­
tage of a rare opportunity. One thought can do the same, because


P E A C E             I S     E V E R Y              S T E P
thoughts always lead to words and actions. If love is in our heart,
every thought, word, and deed can bring about a miracle. Be­
cause understanding is the very foundation of love, words and
actions that emerge from our love are always helpful.
                 Hugging Meditation
Hugging is a beautiful Western custom, and we from the East
would like to contribute the practice of conscious breathing to it.
When you hold a child in your arms, or hug your mother, or your
husband, or your friend, if you breathe in and out three times,
your happiness will be multiplied at least tenfold.
   If you are distracted, thinking about other things, your hug
will be distracted also, not very deep, and you may not enjoy
hugging very much. So when you hug your child, your friend,
your spouse, I recommend that you first breathe in and out con­
sciously and return to the present moment. Then, while you
hold him or her in your arms, breathe three times consciously,
and you will enjoy your hugging more than ever before.
   We practiced hugging meditation at a retreat for psychother­
apists in Colorado, and one retreatant, when he returned home
to Philadelphia, hugged his wife at the airport in a way he had
                                85


T     H      I   e    H      N    H   A    T       H    A   N     H
never hugged her before. Because of that, his wife attended our
next retreat, in Chicago.
   It takes time to become comfortable hugging this way. If you
feel a little hollow inside, you may want to slap your friend's back
while you hug him in order to prove that you are really there. But
to be really there, you only need to breathe, and suddenly he be­
comes completely real. The two of you really exist in that mo­
ment. It may be one of the best moments in your life.
   Suppose your daughter comes and presents herself to you. If
you are not really there-if you are thinking of the past, wor­
rying about the future, or possessed by anger or fear-the child,
although standing in front of you, will not exist for you. She is
like a ghost, and you may be like a ghost also. If you want to be
with her, you have to return to the present moment. Breathing
consciously, uniting body and mind, you make yourself into a
real person again. When you become a real person, your daugh­
ter becomes real also. She is a wondrous presence, and a real en­
counter with life is possible at that moment. If you hold her in
your arms and breathe, you will awaken to the preciousness of
your loved one, and life is.
                                  86


P E A C E              I S     E V E R Y            S T E P
                   Investing in Friends
Even if we have a lot of money in the bank, we can die very easily
from our suffering. So, investing in a friend, making a friend
into a real friend, building a community of friends, is a much
better source of security. We will have someone to lean on, to
come to, during our difficult moments.
   We can get in touch with the refreshing, healing elements
within and around us thanks to the loving support of other
people. If we have a good community of friends, we are very for­
tunate. To create a good community, we first have to transform
ourselves into a good element of the community. After that, we
can go to another person and help him or her become an element
of the community. We build our network of friends that way.
We have to think of friends and community as investments, as
our most important asset. They can comfort us and help us in
difficult times, and they can share our joy and happiness.


T     H    I   e     H      N    H    A   T        H     A    N    H
                      It Is a Great Joy
               to Hold Your Grandchild
You know that elderly people are very sad when they have to live
separately from their children and grandchildren. This is one of
the things in the West that I do not like. In my country, aged
people have the right to live with the younger people. It is the
grandparents who tell fairy tales to the children. When they get
old, their skin is cold and wrinkled, and it is a great joy for them
to hold their grandchild, so warm and tender. When a person
grows old, his deepest hope is to have a grandchild to hold in his
arms. He hopes for it day and night, and when he hears that his
daughter or daughter-in-law is pregnant, he is so happy. Now­
adays the elderly have to go to a home where they live only
among other aged people. Just once a week they receive a short
visit, and afterwards they feel even sadder. We have to find ways
for old and young people to live together again. It will make all
of us very happy.
                                 88


P E A C E             I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
                        Community
                    oj Minciful Living
The foundation of a good community is a daily life that is joyful
and happy. In Plum Village, children are the center of attention.
Each adult is responsible for helping the children be happy, be­
cause we know that if the children are happy, it is easy for the
adults to be happy.
    When I was a child, families were bigger. Parents, cousins,
uncles, aunts, grandparents, and children all lived together. The
houses were surrounded by trees where we could hang ham­
mocks and organize picnics. In those times, people did not have
many of the problems we have today. Now our families are very
small, just mother, father, and one or two children. When the
parents have a problem, the whole family feels the effects. Even
if the children go into the bathroom to try to get away, they can
feel the heavy atmosphere. They may grow up with seeds of suf­
fering and never be truly happy. Formerly, when mom and dad
had problems, the children could escape by going to an aunt or
uncle, or other family member. They still had someone to look
up to, and the atmosphere was not so threatening.
    I think that communities of mindful living, where we can
visit a network of "aunts, uncles, and cousins," may help us re­
place our former big families. Each of us needs to "belong to"


T    H     I   e     H       N   H     A    T       H    A  N     H
such a place, where each feature of the landscape, the sounds of
the bell, and even the buildings are designed to remind us to re­
turn to awareness. I imagine that there will be beautiful practice
centers where regular retreats will be organized, and individuals
and families will go there to learn and practice the art of mindful
living.
   The people who live there should emanate peace and fresh­
ness, the fruits of living in awareness. They will be like beautiful
trees, and the visitors will want to come and sit under their shade.
Even when they cannot actually visit, they only need to think of
it and smile, and they will feel themselves becoming peaceful
and happy.
    We can also transform our own family or household into a
community that practices harmony and awareness. Together we
can practice breathing and smiling, sitting together, drinking tea
together in mindfulness. If we have a bell, the bell is also part of
the community, because the bell helps us practice. If we have a
meditation cushion, the cushion is also part of the community, as
are many other things that help us practice mindfulness, such as
the air for breathing. If we live near a park or a riverbank, we can
enjoy walking meditation there. All these efforts can help us es­
tablish a community at home. From time to time we can invite a
friend to join us. Practicing mindfulness is much easier with a
community.


P E A C E            I   S     E V E R Y              S T E P
                        Minijulness
                    Must Be Engaged
When I was in Vietnam, so many of our villages were being
bombed. Along with my monastic brothers and sisters, I had to
decide what to do. Should we continue to practice in our mon­
asteries, or should we leave the meditation halls in order to help
the people who were suffering under the bombs? After careful
reflection, we decided to do both-to go out and help people
and to do so in mindfulness. We called it engaged Buddhism.
Mindfulness must be engaged. Once there is seeing, there must
be acting. Otherwise, what is the use of seeing?
   We must be aware of the real problems of the world. Then,
with mindfulness, we will know what to do and what not to do
to be of help. If we maintain awareness of our breathing and
continue to practice smiling, even in difficult situations, many
people, animals, and plants will benefit from our way of doing
things. Are you massaging our Mother Earth every time your
foot touches her? Are you planting seeds of joy and peace? I try
to do exactly that with every step, and I know that our Mother
Earth is most appreciative. Peace is every step. Shall we continue
our journey ?


 P A R T  T H R E E
Peace Is Every Step


                            Interbeing
If you are a poet, you will see clearly that there is a cloud floating
in this sheet of paper. Without a cloud, there will be no rain;
without rain, the trees cannot grow; and without trees, we can­
not make paper. The cloud is essential for the paper to exist. If
the cloud is not here, the sheet of paper cannot be here either. So
we can say that the cloud and the paper inter-are. "Interbeing" is
a word that is not in the dictionary yet, but if we combine the pre­
fix "inter-" with the verb "to be," we have a new verb, inter-be.
   If we look into this sheet of paper even more deeply, we can
see the sunshine in it. Without sunshine, the forest cannot grow.
In fact, nothing can grow without sunshine. And so, we know
that the sunshine is also in this sheet of paper. The paper and the
sunshine inter-are. And if we continue to look, we can see the
logger who cut the tree and brought it to the mill to be trans­
formed into paper. And we see wheat. We know that the logger
cannot exist without his daily bread, and therefore the wheat
that became his bread is also in this sheet of paper. The logger's
father and mother are in it too. When we look in this way, we see
that without all of these things, this sheet of paper cannot exist.
   Looking even more deeply, we can see ourselves in this sheet
of paper too. This is not difficult to see, because when we look at
a sheet of paper, it is part of our perception. Your mind is in here
and mine is also. So we can say that everything is in here with this
sheet of paper. We cannot point out one thing that is not here-


T     H    I    e    H      N     H     A    T      H    A    N    H
time, space, the earth, the rain, the minerals in the soil, the sun­
shine, the cloud, the river, the heat. Everything co-exists with this
sheet of paper. That is why I think the word inter-be should be
in the dictionary. "To be" is to inter-be. We cannot just be by our­
selves alone. We have to inter-be with every other thing. This
sheet of paper is, because everything else is.
   Suppose we try to return one of the elements to its source.
Suppose we return the sunshine to the sun. Do you think that
this sheet of paper will be possible? No, without sunshine noth­
ing can be. And if we return the logger to his mother, then we
have no sheet of paper either. The fact is that this sheet of paper
is made up only of "non-paper" elements. And if we return
these non-paper elements to their sources, then there can be no
paper at all. Without non-paper elements, like mind, logger,
sunshine and so on, there will be no paper. As thin as this sheet
of paper is, it contains everything in the universe in it.
                  Flowers and Garbage
Defiled or immaculate. Dirty or pure. These are concepts we
form in our mind. A beautiful rose we have just cut and placed
in our vase is pure. It smells so good, so fresh. A garbage can is
the opposite. It smells horrible, and it is filled with rotten things.
    But that is only when we look on the surface. If we look more


P E A C E               I S     E V E R Y             S T E P
deeply we will see that in just five or six days, the rose will be­
come part of the garbage. We do not need to wait five days to see
it. If we just look at the rose, and we look deeply, we can see it
now. And if we look into the garbage can, we see that in a few
months its contents can be transformed into lovely vegetables,
and even a rose. If you are a good organic gardener, looking at a
rose you can see the garbage, and looking at the garbage you can
see a rose. Roses and garbage inter-are. Without a rose, we can­
not have garbage; and without garbage, we cannot have a rose.
They need each other very much. The rose and the garbage are
equal. The garbage is just as precious as the rose. If we look
deeply at the concepts of defilement and immaculateness, we re­
turn to the notion of interbeing.
    In the city of Manila there are many young prostitutes; some
are only fourteen or fifteen years old. They are very unhappy.
They did not want to be prostitutes, but their families are poor
and these young girls went to the city to look for some kind of
job, like street vendor, to make money to send back to their fam­
ilies. Of course this is true not only in Manila, but in Ho Chi
Minh City in Vietnam, in New York City, and in Paris also. After
only a few weeks in the city, a vulnerable girl can be persuaded
by a clever person to work for him and earn perhaps one hun­
dred times more money than she could as a street vendor. Be­
cause she is so young and does not know much about life, she ac­
cepts and becomes a prostitute. Since that time, she has carried
the feeling of being impure, defiled, and this causes her great
suffering. When she looks at other young girls, dressed beauti­
fully, belonging to good families, a wretched feeling wells up in
her, a feeling of defilement that becomes her hell.
                                  97


T     H     I   e    H      N    H     A    T      H     A    N   H
    But if she could look deeply at herself and at the whole situ­
ation, she would see that she is the way she is because other
people are the way they are. How can a "good girl," belonging to
a good family, be proud ? Because the "good family's" way of life
is the way it is, the prostitute has to live as a prostitute. No one
among us has clean hands. No one of us can claim that it is not
our responsibility. The girl in Manila is that way because of the
way we are. Looking into the life of that young prostitute, we see
the lives of all the "non-prostitutes." And looking at the non­
prostitutes and the way we live our lives, we see the prostitute.
Each thing helps to create the other.
    Let us look at wealth and poverty. The affiuent society and the
deprived society inter-are. The wealth of one society is made of
the poverty of the other. "This is like this, because that is like
that." Wealth is made of non-wealth elements, and poverty is
made by non-poverty elements. It is exactly the same as with the
sheet of paper. So we must be careful not to imprison ourselves
in concepts. The truth is that everything contains everything
else. We cannot just be, we can only inter-be. We are responsible
for everything that happens around us.
    Only by seeing with the eyes of interbeing can that young girl
be freed from her suffering. Only then will she understand that
she is bearing the burden of the whole world. What else can we
offer her? Looking deeply into ourselves, we see her, and we will
share her pain and the pain of the whole world. Then we can be­
gin to be of real help.


P E A C E                I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
                          Waging Peace
If the Earth were your body, you would be able to feel the many
areas where it is suffering. War, political and economic oppres­
sion, famine, and pollution wreak havoc in so many places.
Every day, children are becoming blind from malnutrition, their
hands searching hopelessly through mounds of trash for a few
ounces of food. Adults are dying slowly in prisons for trying to
oppose violence. Rivers are dying, and the air is becoming more
and more difficult to breathe. Although the two great super­
powers are becoming a little more friendly, they still have
enough nuclear weapons to destroy the Earth dozens of times.
    Many people are aware of the world's suffering; their hearts
are filled with compassion. They know what needs to be done,
and they engage in political, social, and environmental work to
try to change things. But after a period of intense involvement,
they may become discouraged if they lack the strength needed
to sustain a life of action. Real strength is not in power, money, or
weapons, but in deep, inner peace.
    Practicing mindfulness in each moment ofour daily lives, we
can cultivate our own peace. With clarity, determination, and
patience-the fruits of meditation-we can sustain a life of ac­
tion and be real instruments of peace. I have seen this peace in
people of various religious and cultural backgrounds who spend
their time and energy protecting the weak, struggling for social
                                   99


T    H      I  e    H       N    H     A   T      H     A    N    H
justice, lessening the disparity between rich and poor, stopping
the arms race, fighting against discrimination, and watering the
trees of love and understanding throughout the world.
                           Not Two
When we want to understand something, we cannot just stand
outside and observe it. We have to enter deeply into it and be one
with it in order to really understand. If we want to understand a
person, we have to feel his feelings, suffer his sufferings, and en­
joy his joy. The word "comprehend" is made up of the Latin
roots cum, which means "with," and prehendere, which means
"to grasp it or pick it up." To comprehend something means to
pick it up and be one with it. There is no other way to understand
something. In Buddhism, we call this kind of understanding
"non-duality." Not two.
   Fifteen years ago, I helped a committee for orphans who were
victims of the war in Vietnam. From Vietnam, the social work­
ers sent out applications, one sheet of paper with a small picture
of a child in the corner, telling the name, age, and conditions of
the orphan. My job was to translate the application from Viet­
namese into French in order to seek a sponsor, so that the child
would have food to eat and books for school, and be put into the
                                 1 00


P E A C E              I S      E V E R Y               S T E P
family of an aunt, an uncle, or a grandparent. Then the com­
mittee in France could send the money to the family member to
help take care of the child.
    Each day I helped translate about thirty applications. The
way I did it was to look at the picture of the child. I did not read
the application, I just took time to look at the picture of the child.
Usually after only thirty or forty seconds, I became one with the
child. Then I would pick up the pen and translate the words
from the application onto another sheet. Afterwards I realized
that it was not me who had translated the application; it was the
child and me, who had become one. Looking at his or her face, I
felt inspired, and I became the child and he or she became me,
and together we did the translation. It is very natural. You don't
have to practice a lot of meditation to be able to do that. You just
look, allowing yourself to be, and you lose yourself in the child,
and the child in you.
                          Healing the
                       Wounds oj War
If only the United States had had the vision of non-duality con­
cerning Vietnam, we would not have had so much destruction
                                !OI


T     H     I   e    H     N     H     A    T       H   A    N     H
in both countries. The war continues to hurt both Americans
and Vietnamese. If we are attentive enough, we can still learn
from the war in Vietnam.
   Last year we had a wonderful retreat with Vietnam veterans
in America. I t was a difficult retreat, because many of us could
not get free of our pain. One gentleman told me that in Vietnam,
he lost four hundred seventeen people in one battle alone, in one
day. Four hundred seventeen men died in one battle, and he has
had to live with that for more than fifteen years. Another person
told me that out of anger and revenge, he took the life of children
in a village, and after that, he lost all his peace. Ever since that
time, he has not been able to sit alone with children in a room.
                   ,-.
There are many kinds of suffering, and they can prevent us from
being in touch with the non-suffering world.
   We must practice helping each other be in touch. One soldier
told me that this retreat was the first time in fifteen years that he
felt safe in a group of people. For fifteen years, he could not swal­
low solid food easily. He could only drink some fruit juice and
eat some fruit. He was completely shut off and could not com­
municate. But after three or four days of practice, he began to
open up and talk to people. You have to offer a lot of loving kind­
ness in order to help such a person touch things again. During
the retreat, we practiced mindful breathing and smiling, en­
couraging each other to come back to the flower in us, and to the
trees and the blue sky that shelter us.
    We had a silent breakfast. We practiced eating breakfast the
 way I ate the cookie of my childhood. We did things like that,
 making mindful steps in order to touch the Earth, breathing
                                 1 02


P E A C E               I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
consciously in order to touch the air, and looking at our tea
deeply in order to really be in touch with the tea. We sat together,
breathed together, walked together, and tried to learn from our
experience in Vietnam. The veterans have something to tell their
nation about how to deal with other problems that are likely to
happen, problems that will not look different from Vietnam.
Out of our sufferings, we should learn something.
    We need the vision of interbeing-we belong to each other;
we cannot cut reality into pieces. The well-being of "this" is the
well-being of "that," so we have to do things together. Every side
is "our side"; there is no evil side. Veterans have experience that
makes them the light at the tip of the candle, illuminating the
roots of war and the way to peace.
                    The Sun My Heart
We know that if our heart stops beating, the flow of our life will
stop, and so we cherish our heart very much. Yet we do not often
take the time to notice that other things, outside of our bodies,
are also essential for our survival. Look at the immense light we
call the sun. If it were to stop shining, the flow of our life would
also stop, so the sun is our second heart, a heart outside of our
body. This immense "heart" gives all life on Earth the warmth


T    H      I  e    H      N     H    A   T       H     A   N     H
necessary for existence. Plants live thanks to the sun. Their leaves
absorb the sun's energy, along with carbon dioxide from the air,
to produce food for the tree, the flower, the plankton. And
thanks to plants, we and other animals can live. All of us­
people, animals, and plants-consume the sun, directly and in­
directly. We cannot begin to describe all the effects of the sun,
that great heart outside of our body.
   Our body is not limited to what is inside the boundary of our
skin. It is much more immense. It includes even the layer of air
around our Earth; for if the atmosphere were to disappear for
even an instant, our life would end. There is no phenomenon in
the universe that does not intimately concern us, from a pebble
resting at the bottom of the ocean, to the movement of a galaxy
millions of light-years away. Walt Whitman said, "I believe a
leaf of grass is no less than the journey-work of the stars. . . ."
These words are not philosophy. They come from the depths of
his soul. He said, "I am large, I contain multitudes."
                      Looking Deeply
We have to look deeply at things in order to see. When a swim­
mer enjoys the clear water of the river, he or she should also be
able to be the river. One day, during one of my first visits to the


P E A C E             I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
United States, I was having lunch at Boston University with
some friends, and I looked down at the Charles River. I had been
away from home for quite a long time, and seeing the river, I
found it very beautiful. So I left my friends and went down to
wash my face and di p my feet in the water, as we used to do in our
country. When I returned, a professor said, "That's a very dan­
gerous thing to do. Did you rinse your mouth in the river? "
When I told him yes, he said, "You should see a doctor and get a
shot."
   I was shocked. I hadn't known that the rivers here were so pol­
luted. Some of them are called "dead rivers." In our country the
rivers get very muddy sometimes, but not that kind of dirty.
Someone told me that the Rhine River in Germany contains so
many chemicals that it is possible to develop photographs in it. If
we want to continue to enjoy our rivers-to swim in them, walk
beside them, even drink their water-we have to adopt the non­
dual perspective. We have to meditate on being the river so that
we can experience within ourselves the fears and hopes of the
river. If we cannot feel the rivers, the mountains, the air, the an­
imals, and other people from within their own perspective, the
rivers will die and we will lose our chance for peace.
   If you are a mountain climber or someone who enjoys the
countryside, or the green forest, you know that the forests are
our lungs outside of our bodies, just as the sun is our heart out­
side of our bodies. Yet we have been acting in a way that has al­
lowed two million square miles of forest land to be destroyed by
acid rain, and we have destroyed parts of the ozone layer that
regulate how much direct sunlight we receive. We are impris-


T     H    I   e     H     N    H     A    T      H      A    N    H
oned in our small selves, thinking only of the comfortable con­
ditions for this small self, while we destroy our large self. We
should be able to be our true self. That means we should be able
to be the river, we should be able to be the forest, the sun, and the
ozone layer. We must do this to understand and to have hope for
the future.
                            The Art
                     oj Minijul Living
Nature is our mother. Because we live cut off from her, we get
sick. Some of us live in boxes called apartments, very high above
the ground. Around us are only cement, metal, and hard things
like that. Our fingers do not have a chance to touch the soil; we
don't grow lettuce anymore. Because we are so distant from our
Mother Earth, we become sick. That is why we need to go out
from time to time and be in nature. It is very important. We and
our children should be in touch again with Mother Earth. In
many cities, we cannot see trees-the color green is entirely ab­
sent from our view.
   One day, I imagined a city where there was only one tree left.
The tree was still beautiful, but very much alone, surrounded by
                                106


P E A C E              I S     E V E R Y              S T E P
buildings, in the center of the city. Many people were getting
sick, and most doctors did not know how to deal with the illness.
But one very good doctor knew the causes of the sickness and
gave this prescription to each patient: "Every day, take the bus
and go to the center of the city to look at the tree. As you ap­
proach it, practice breathing in and out, and when you get there,
hug the tree, breathing in and out for fifteen minutes, while you
look at the tree, so green, and smell its bark, so fragrant. If you
do that, in a few weeks you will feel much better."
   The people began to feel better, but very soon there were so
many people rushing to the tree that they stood in line for miles
and miles. You know that people of our time do not have much
patience, so standing three or four hours to wait to hug the tree
was too much, and they rebelled. They organized demonstra­
tions in order to make a new law that each person could only hug
the tree for five minutes, but of course that reduced the time for
healing. And soon, the time was reduced to one minute, and the
chance of being healed by our mother was lost.
   We could be in that situation very soon if we are not mindful.
We have to practice awareness of each thing we do if we want to
save our Mother Earth, and ourselves and our children as well.
For example, when we look into our garbage, we can see lettuce,
cucumbers, tomatoes, and flowers. When we throw a banana
peel into the garbage, we are aware that it is a banana peel that
we are throwing out and that it will be transformed into a flower
or a vegetable very soon. That is exactly the practice of med­
itation.
   When we throw a plastic bag into the garbage, we know that


T     H     I   e    H      N     H    A    T      H    A   N      H
it is different from a banana peel. It will take a long time to be­
come a flower. "Throwing a plastic bag into the garbage, I know
that I am throwing a plastic bag into the garbage." That aware­
ness alone helps us protect the Earth, make peace, and take care
of life in the present moment and in the future. If we are aware,
naturally we will try to use fewer plastic bags. This is an act of
peace, a basic kind of peace action.
    When we throw a plastic disposable diaper into the garbage,
we know that it takes even longer for it to become a flower, four
hundred years or longer. Knowing that using these kinds of dia­
pers is not in the direction of peace, we look for other ways to take
care of our baby. Practicing breathing and contemplating our
body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind, we practice peace in
the present moment. This is living mindfully.
    Nuclear waste is the worst kind of garbage. It takes about
250,000 years to become flowers. Forty of the fifty United States
are already polluted by nuclear waste. We are making the Earth
an impossible place to live for ourselves and for many genera­
tions of children. If we live our present moment mindfully, we
will know what to do and what not to do, and we will try to do
things in the direction of peace.
                                  1 08


P E A C E             I   S    E V E R Y               S T E P
                 Nourishing Awareness
When we sit down to dinner and look at our plate filled with fra­
grant and appetizing food, we can nourish our awareness of the
bitter pain of people who suffer from hunger. Every day, 40,000
children die as a result of hunger and malnutrition. Every day !
Such a figure shocks us every time we hear it. Looking deeply at
our plate, we can "see" Mother Earth, the farm workers, and the
tragedy of hunger and malnutrition.
   We who live in North America and Europe are accustomed
to eating grains and other foods imported from the Third
World, such as coffee from Colombia, chocolate from Ghana, or
fragrant rice from Thailand. We must be aware that children in
these countries, except those from rich families, never see such
fine products. They eat inferior foods, while the finer products
are put aside for export in order to bring in foreign exchange.
There are even some parents who, because they do not have the
means to feed their children, resort to selling their children to be
servants to families who have enough to eat.
   Before each meal, we can join our palms in mindfulness and
think about the children who do not have enough to eat. Doing
so will help us maintain mindfulness of our good fortune, and
perhaps one day we will find ways to do something to help
change the system of injustice that exists in the world. In many
refugee families, before each meal, a child holds up his bowl of
                               1 09


T     H    I   e    H      N    H     A    T       H    A      N     H
rice and says something like this: "Today, on the table, there are
many delicious foods. I am grateful to be here with my family
enjoying these wonderful dishes. I know there are many chil­
dren less fortunate, who are very hungry." Being a refugee he
knows, for example, that most Thai children never see the kind
of fine rice grown in Thailand that he is about to eat. It is difficult
to explain to children in the "overdeveloped" nations that not all
children in the world have such beautiful and nourishing food.
Awareness of this fact alone can help us overcome many of our
own psychological pains. Eventually our contemplations can
help us see how to assist those who need our help so much.
                       A Love Letter
                  to Your Congressman
In the peace movement there is a lot of anger, frustration, and
misunderstanding. People in the peace movement can write
very good protest letters, but they are not so skilled at writing
love letters. We need to learn to write letters to the Congress and
the President that they will want to read, and not just throw
away. The way we speak, the kind of understanding, the kind of
                                 l IO


P E A C E             I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
language we use should not turn people off. The President is a
person like any of us.
   Can the peace movement talk in loving speech, showing the
way for peace? I think that will depend on whether the people
in the peace movement can "be peace." Because without being
peace, we cannot do anything for peace. If we cannot smile, we
cannot help other people smile. If we are not peaceful, then we
cannot contribute to the peace movement.
   I hope we can offer a new dimension to the peace movement.
The peace movement often is filled with anger and hatred and
does not fulfill the role we expect of it. A fresh way of being
peace, of making peace is needed. That is why it is so important
for us to practice mindfulness, to acquire the capacity to look, to
see, and to understand. It would be wonderful if we could bring
to the peace movement our non-dualistic way of looking at
things. That alone would diminish hatred and aggression. Peace
work means, first of all, being peace. We rely on each other. Our
children are relying on us in order for them to have a future.
                         Citi�nship
As citizens, we have a large responsibility. Our daily lives, the
way we drink, what we eat, have to do with the world's political
                                I I I


T    H     I    e   H       N    H    A     T    H    A    N    H
situation. Every day we do things, we are things, that have to do
with peace. If we are aware of our lifestyle, our way of consum­
ing, oflooking at things, we will know how to make peace right
in the moment we are alive. We think that our government is
free to make any policy it wishes, but that freedom depends on
our daily life. If we make it possible for them to change policies,
they will do it. Now it is not yet possible.
   You may think that if you were to enter government and ob­
tain power, you would be able to do anything you wanted, but
that is not true. If you became President, you would be con­
fronted by this hard fact-you would probably do almost exactly
the same thing as our current President, perhaps a little better,
perhaps a little worse.
   Meditation is to look deeply into things and to see how we can
change ourselves and how we can transform our situation. To
transform our situation is also to transform our minds. To trans­
form our minds is also to transform our situation, because the
situation is mind, and mind is situation. Awakening is impor­
tant. The nature of the bombs, the nature of injustice, and the
nature of our own beings are the same.
   As we ourselves begin to live more responsibly, we must ask
our political leaders to move in the same direction. We have to
encourage them to stop polluting our environment and our con­
sciousness. We should help them appoint advisors who share our
way of thinking about peace, so that they can turn to these people
for advice and support. It will require some degree of enlight­
enment on our part to support our political leaders, especially
when they are campaigning for office. We have the opportunity
                                 1 12


P E A C E                I S      E V E R Y             S T E P
to tell them about many important things, instead of choosing
leaders by how handsome they look on television and then feel­
ing discouraged later by their lack of mindfulness.
    If we write articles and give speeches that express our convic­
tion that political leaders should be helped by those who practice
mindfulness, those who have a deep sense of calm and peace and
a clear visionof what the world should be, we will begin to elect
leaders who can help us move in the direction of peace. The
French government has made some efforts in this direction, ap­
pointing as Ministers a number of ecologists and humanitarians,
such as Bernard Cushman, who helped rescue boat people on
the Gulf of Siam. This kind of attitude is a good sign.
                       Ecology oj Mind
We need harmony, we need peace. Peace is based on respect for
life, the spirit of reverence for life. Not only do we have to respect
the lives of human beings, but we have to respect the lives of an­
imals, vegetables, and minerals. Rocks can be alive. A rock can
be destroyed. The Earth also. The destruction of our health by
pollution of the air and water is linked to the destruction of the
minerals. The way we farm, the way we deal with our garbage,
all these things are related to each other.
                                    ll�


T     H   I    e     H     N    H     A    T      H    A    N     H
   Ecology should be a deep ecology. Not only deep but univer­
sal, because there is pollution in our consciousness. Television,
for instance, is a form of pollution for us and for our children.
Television sows seeds of violence and anxiety in our children,
and pollutes their consciousness, just as we destroy our environ­
ment by chemicals, tree-cutting, and polluting the water. We
need to protect the ecology of the mind, or this kind of violence
and recklessness will continue to spill over into many other areas
of life.
                     The Roots oj War
In 1966, when I was in the u.s. calling for a ceasefire to the war
in Vietnam, a young American peace activist stood up during a
talk I was giving and shouted, "The best thing you can do is go
back to your country and defeat the American aggressors ! You
shouldn't be here. There is absolutely no use to your being here ! "
   He and many Americans wanted peace, but the kind of peace
they wanted was the defeat of one side in order to satisfy their an­
ger. Because they had called for a ceasefire and had not suc­
ceeded, they became angry, and finally they were unable to ac­
cept any solution short of the defeat of their own country. But we
Vietnamese who were suffering under the bombs had to be
                                1 14


P E A C E             I S         E V E R Y            S T E P
more realistic. We wanted peace. We did not care about anyone's
victory or defeat. We just wanted the bombs to stop falling on us.
But many people in the peace movement opposed our proposal
for an immediate ceasefire. No one seemed to understand.
   So when I heard that young man shouting, "Go home and de­
feat the American aggressors," I took several deep breaths to re­
gain myself, and I said, "Sir, it seems to me that many of the roots
of the war are here in your country. That is why I have come.
One of the roots is your way of seeing the world. Both sides are
victims of a wrong policy, a policy that believes in the force of vi­
olence to settle problems. I do not want Vietnamese to die, and I
do not want American soldiers to die either."
   The roots of war are in the way we live our daily lives-the
way we develop our industries, build up our society, and con­
sume goods. We have to look deeply into the situation, and we
will see the roots of war. We cannot just blame one side or the
other. We have to transcend the tendency to take sides.
   During any conflict, we need people who can understand the
suffering of all sides. For example, if a number of people in
South Africa could go to each side and understand their suffer­
ing, and communicate that to the other sides, that would be very
helpful. We need links. We need communication.
   Practicing nonviolence is first of all to become nonviolence.
Then when a difficult situation presents itself, we will react in a
way that will help the situation. This applies to problems of the
family as well as to problems of society.


T     H    I   e    H      N     H    A     T       H     A    N     H
                         Like a Leaf,
                  We Have Many Stems
One autumn day, I was in a park, absorbed in the contemplation
ofa very small, beautiful leaf, shaped like a heart. Its color was
almost red, and it was barely hanging on the branch, nearly
ready to fall down. I spent a long time with it, and I asked the leaf
a number of questions. I found out the leaf had been a mother
to the tree. Usually we think that the tree is the mother and the
leaves are just children, but as I looked at the leaf I saw that the
leaf is also a mother to the tree. The sap that the roots take up is
only water and minerals, not sufficient to nourish the tree. So the
tree distributes that sap to the leaves, and the leaves transform
the rough sap into elaborated sap and, with the help of the sun
and gas, send it back to the tree for nourishment. Therefore, the
leaves are also the mother to the tree. Since the leaf is linked to the
tree by a stem, the communication between them is easy to see.
   We do not have a stem linking us to our mother anymore, but
when we were in her womb, we had a very long stem, an umbil­
ical cord. The oxygen and the nourishment we needed came to
us through that stem. But on the day we were born, it was cut off,
and we received the illusion that we became independent. That
is not true. We continue to rely on our mother for a very long
time, and we have many other mothers as well. The Earth is our
                                 1 16


P E A C E               I S        E V E R Y               S T E P
mother. We have a great many stems linking us to our Mother
Earth. There are stems linking us with the clouds. If there are no
clouds, there will be no water for us to drink. We are made of at
least seventy percent water, and the stem between the cloud and
us is really there. This is also the case with the river, the forest, the
logger, and the farmer. There are hundreds of thousands of
stems linking us to everything in the cosmos, supporting us and
making it possible for us to be. Do you see the link between you
and me? If you are not there, I am not here. This is certain. If you
do not see it yet, please look more deeply and I am sure you will.
   I asked the leaf whether it was frightened because it was au­
tumn and the other leaves were falling. The leaf told me, "No.
During the whole spring and summer I was completely alive. I
worked hard to help nourish the tree, and now much of me is in
the tree. I am not limited by this form. I am also the whole tree,
and when I go back to the soil, I will continue to nourish the tree.
So I don't worry at all. As I leave this branch and float to the
ground, I will wave to the tree and tell her, 'I will see you again
very soon.' "
   That day there was a wind blowing and, after a while, I saw
the leaf leave the branch and float down to the soil, dancing joy­
fully, because as it floated it saw itself already there in the tree. It
was so happy. I bowed my head, knowing that I have a lot to learn
from that leaf.
                                    I I7


T     H     I   e     H      N    H    A     T      H    A    N     H
                            We Are All
                   Linked to Each Other
Millions of people follow sports. If you love to watch soccer or
baseball, you probably root for one team and identify with them.
You may watch the games with despair and elation. Perhaps you
give a little kick or swing to help the ball along. If you do not take
sides, the fun is missing. In wars we also pick sides, usually the
side that is being threatened. Peace movements are born of this
feeling. We get angry, we shout, but rarely do we rise above all
this to look at a conflict the way a mother would who is watching
her two children fighting. She seeks only their reconciliation.
   "In order to fight each other, the chicks born from the same
mother hen put colors on their faces." This is a well-known Viet­
namese saying. Putting colors on our own face is to make our­
selves a stranger to our own brothers and sisters. We can only
shoot others when they are strangers. Real efforts for reconcili­
ation arise when we see with the eyes of compassion, and that
ability comes when we see clearly the nature of interbeing and
interpenetration of all beings.
   In our lives, we may be lucky enough to know someone whose
love extends to animals and plants. We may also know people
who, although they themselves live in a safe situation, realize
that famine, disease, and oppression are destroying millions of
                                  l IS


P E A C E               I S    E V E R Y             S T E P
people on Earth and look for ways to help those who suffer. They
cannot forget the downtrodden, even amidst the pressures of
their own lives. At least to some extent, these people have real­
ized the interdependent nature of life. They know that the sur­
vival of the underdeveloped countries cannot be separated from
the survival of the materially wealthy, technically advanced
countries. Poverty and oppression bring war. In our times, every
war involves all countries. The fate of each country is linked to
the fate of all others.
   When will the chicks of the same mother hen remove the
colors from their faces and recognize each other as brothers and
sisters? The only way to end the danger is for each of us to do so,
and to say to others, "I am your brother." "I am your sister." "We
are all humankind, and our life is one."
                         Reconciliation
What can we do when we have hurt people and now they con­
sider us to be their enemy? These people might be people in our
family, in our community, or in another country. I think you
know the answer. There are few things to do. The first thing is
to take the time to say, "I am sorry, I hurt you out of my igno­
rance, out of my lack of mindfulness, out of my lack of skillful-
                                1 19


T     H    I    e    H      N     H    A     T      H     A   N     H
ness. I will try my best to change myself. I don't dare to say any­
thing more to you." Sometimes, we do not have the intention to
hurt, but because we are not mindful or skillful enough, we hurt
someone. Being mindful in our daily life is important, speaking
in a way that will not hurt anyone.
   The second thing to do is to try to bring out the best part in
ourselves, the part of the flower, to transform ourselves. That is
the only way to demonstrate what you have just said. When you
have become fresh and pleasant, the other person will notice very
soon. Then when there is a chance to approach that person, you
can come to her as a flower and she will notice immediately that
you are quite different. You may not have to say anything. Just
seeing you like that, she will accept you and forgive you. That is
called "speaking with your life and not just with words."
   When you begin to see that your enemy is suffering, that is the
beginning of insight. When you see in yourself the wish that the
other person stop suffering, that is a sign of real love. But be care­
ful. Sometimes you may think that you are stronger than you ac­
tually are. To test your real strength, try going to the other person
to listen and talk to him or her, and you will discover right away
whether your loving compassion is real. You need the other per­
son in order to test. If you just meditate on some abstract prin­
ciple such as understanding or love, it may be just your imagi­
nation and not real understanding or real love.
    Reconciliation does not mean to sign an agreement with du­
plicity and cruelty. Reconciliation opposes all forms of ambition,
without taking sides. Most of us want to take sides in each en­
counter or conflict. We distinguish right from wrong based on
                                  1 20


P E A C E             I S       E V E R Y             S T E P
partial evidence or hearsay. We need indignation in order to act,
but even righteous, legitimate indignation is not enough. Our
world does not lack people willing to throw themselves into ac­
tion. What we need are people who are capable of loving, of not
taking sides so that they can embrace the whole of reality.
   We have to continue to practice mindfulness and reconcilia­
tion until we can see a child's body of skin and bones in Uganda
or Ethiopia as our own, until the hunger and pain in the bodies
of all species are our own. Then we will have realized non­
discrimination, real love. Then we can look at all beings with the
eyes of compassion, and we can do the real work to help alleviate
suffering.
                         Call Me by
                     My True Names
In Plum Village, where I live in France, we receive many letters
from the refugee camps in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia,
Thailand, and the Philippines, hundreds each week. It is very
painful to read them, but we have to do it, we have to be in con­
tact. We try our best to help, but the suffering is enormous, and
sometimes we are discouraged. It is said that half the boat people
                                 121


T     H       I  e      H       N   H     A    T       H   A    N    H
die in the ocean. Only half arrive at the shores in Southeast Asia,
and even then they may not be safe.
    There are many young girls, boat people, who are raped by
sea pirates. Even though the United Nations and many coun­
tries try to help the government of Thailand prevent that kind
of piracy, sea pirates continue to inflict much suffering on the ref­
ugees. One day we received a letter telling us about a young girl
on a small boat who was raped by a Thai pirate. She was only
twelve, and she jumped into the ocean and drowned herself.
    When you first learn of something like that, you get angry at
the pirate. You naturally take the side of the girl. As you look
more deeply you will see it differently. If you take the side of the
little girl, then it is easy. You only have to take a gun and shoot the
pirate. But we cannot do that. In my meditation I saw that if I
had been born in the village of the pirate and raised in the same
conditions as he was, there is a great likelihood that I would be­
come a pirate. I saw that many babies are born along the Gulf of
Siam, hundreds every day, and if we educators, social workers,
politicians, and others do not do something about the situation,
in twenty-five years a number of them will become sea pirates.
That is certain. If you or I were born today in those fishing vil­
lages, we may become sea pirates in twenty-five years. If you take
a gun and shoot the pirate, you shoot all of us, because all of us
are to some extent responsible for this state of affairs.
    After a long meditation, I wrote this poem. In it, there are
three people: the twelve-year-old girl, the pirate, and me. Can
we look at each other and recognize ourselves in each other? The
                                     122


P E A C E                  I S      E V E R Y         S T E P
title of the poem is "Please Call Me by My True Names," because
I have so many names. When I hear one of these names, I have
to say, "Yes."
    Do not say that I'll depart tomorrow
    because even today I still arrive.
    Look deeply: I arrive in every second
    to be a bud on a spring branch,
    to be a tiny bird, with wings stillfragile,
    learning to sing in my new nest,
    to be a caterpillar in the heart ofaflower,
    to be ajewelhiding itselfin a stone.
    I still arrive, in order to laugh and to cry,
    in order tofear and to hope.
    The rhythm ofmy heart is the birth and
    death ofall that are alive.
    I am the mayfly metamorphosing on the surface ofthe river,
    and I am the bird which, when spring comes, arrives in time
            to eat the mayfly.
    I am thefrog swimming happily in the clearpond,
    and I am also thegrass-snake who, approaching in silence,
           feeds itself on thefrog.
    I am the child in Uganda, allskin and bones,
    my legs as thin as bamboo stickl,
    and I am the arms merchant, selling deadly weapons to
            Uganda.
                                     12�


T    H     I   e    H       N    H     A     T       H    A    N  H
  I am the twelve-year-oldgir4 refugee on a small boat,
  who throws herselfinto the ocean after being raped by a sea
        pirate,
  and I am the pirate, my heart not yet capable ofseeing and
         loving.
  I am a member of the politburo, with plenty ofpower in my
         hands,
  and I am the man who has to pay his "debt of blood" to my
         people,
  dying slowly in aforced labor camp.
  Myjoy is like spring, so warm it makesflowers bloom in all
         walks of life.
  My pain is like a river oftears, sofull itfills thefour oceans.
  Please call me by my true names,
  so I can hear all my cries and laughs at once,
  so I can see that myjoy and pain are one.
  Please call me by my true names,
  so I can wake up,
  and so the door ofmy heart can be left open,
  the door ofcompassion.


P E A C E              I S     E V E R Y             S T E P
                           Suffering
                  Nourishes Compassion
We have been practicing "engaged Buddhism" in Vietnam for
the last thirty years. During the war, we could not just sit in the
meditation hall. We had to practice mindfulness everywhere, es­
pecially where the worst suffering was going on.
   Being in touch with the kind of suffering we encountered
during the war can heal us of some of the suffering we experi­
ence when our lives are not very meaningful or useful. When
you confront the kinds of difficulties we faced during the war,
you see that you can be a source of compassion and a great help
to many suffering people. In that intense suffering, you feel a
kind of relief and joy within yourself, because you know that
you are an instrument of compassion. Understanding such in­
tense suffering and realizing compassion in the midst of it, you
become a joyful person, even if your life is very hard.
   Last winter, some friends and I went to visit the refugee
camps in Hong Kong, and we witnessed a lot of suffering. There
were "boat people" who were just one or two years old, who were
about to be sent back to their country because they were classi­
fied as illegal immigrants. They had lost both father and mother
during the trip. When you see that kind of suffering, you know
                                125


T     H     I   e    H      N    H     A    T      H    A    N    H
that the suffering your friends in Europe and America are
undergoing is not very great.
   Every time we come back from such a contact, we see that the
city of Paris is not very real. The way people live there and the
reality of the suffering in other parts ofthe world are so different.
I asked the question, how could people live like this when things
are like that? But if you stay in Paris for ten years without being
in touch, you find it normal.
   Meditation is a point of contact. Sometimes you do not have
to go to the place of suffering. You just sit quietly on your cush­
ion, and you can see everything. You can actualize everything,
and you can be aware of what is going on in the world. Out of
that kind of awareness, compassion and understanding arise
naturally, and you can stay right in your own country and per­
form social action.
                       Love in Action
During our journey together, I have presented a number ofprac­
tices to help us maintain mindfulness of what is going on inside
us and immediately around us. Now, as we make our way
through the wider world, some additional guidelines can help us
                                  126


P E A C E              I  S    E V E R Y             S T E P
and protect us. Several members of our community have been
practicing the following principles, and I think you may also find
them useful in making choices as to how to live in our contem­
porary world. We call them the fourteen precepts of the Order
ofInterbeing.
    I. Do not be idolatrous about or bound to any doctrine, the­
ory, or ideology. All systems of thought are guiding means; they
are not absolute truth.
   2.  Do not think that the knowledge you presently possess is
changeless, absolute truth. Avoid being narrow-minded and
bound to present views. Learn and practice non-attachment
from views in order to be open to receive others' viewpoints.
Truth is found in life and not merely in conceptual knowledge.
Be ready to learn throughout your entire life and to observe real­
ity in yourself and in the world at all times.
   3. Do not force others, including children, by any means
whatsoever, to adopt your views, whether by authority, threat,
money, propaganda, or even education. However, through
compassionate dialogue, help others renounce fanaticism and
narrowness.
   4. Do not avoid contact with suffering or close your eyes be­
fore suffering. Do not lose awareness ofthe existence ofsuffering
                                1 27


T     H     I   e   H       N    H    A   T      H   A    N    H
in the life of the world. Find ways to be with those who are suf­
fering, by all means, including personal contact and visits, im­
ages, and sound. By such means, awaken yourself and others to
the reality of suffering in the world.
    5. Do not accumulate wealth while millions are hungry. Do
not take as the aim of your life fame, profit, wealth, or sensual
pleasure. Live simply and share time, energy, and material re­
sources with those who are in need.
   6. Do not maintain anger or hatred. Learn to penetrate and
transform them while they are still seeds in your consciousness.
As soon as anger or hatred arises, turn your attention to your
breathing in order to see and understand the nature of your an­
ger or hatred and the nature ofthe persons who have caused your
anger or hatred.
    7. Do not lose yourself in dispersion and in your surround­
ings. Practice mindful breathing in order to come back to what
is happening in the present moment. Be in touch with what is
wondrous, refreshing, and healing, both inside and around
yoursel( Plant the seeds of joy, peace, and understanding in
yourself in order to facilitate the work of transformation in the
depths ofyour consciousness.
    8. Do not utter words that can create discord and cause the
community to break. Make every effort to reconcile and resolve
all conflicts, however small.
                                 1 28


P E A C E               I  S     E V E R Y              S T E P
   9. Do not say untruthful things for the sake ofpersonal inter­
est or to impress people. Do not utter words that cause division
and hatred. Do not spread news that you do not know to be cer­
tain. Do not criticize or condemn things that you are not sure of.
Always speak truthfully and constructively. Have the courage to
speak out about situations of injustice, even when doing so may
threaten your own safety.
    1 0. Do not use the religious community for personal gain or
profit, or transform your community into a political party. A re­
ligious community should, however, take a clear stand against
oppression and injustice, and should strive to change the situa­
tion without engaging in partisan conflicts.
    I I.  Do not live with a vocation that is harmful to humans and
nature. Do not invest in companies that deprive others of their
chance to live. Select a vocation that helps realize your ideal of
compaSSlOn.
    1 2.  Do not kill. Do not let others kill. Find whatever means
possible to protect life and prevent war.
    13. Possess nothing that should belong to others. Respect the
property of others but prevent others from enriching themselves
from human suffering or the suffering ofother beings.
    1 4 . Do not mistreat your body. Learn to handle it with re­
spect. Do not look on your body as only an instrument. Preserve
                                   1 29


T     H    I   e    H      N    H     A    T       H    A    N    H
vital energies for the realization of the Way. Sexual expression
should not happen without love and commitment. In sexual re­
lationships, be aware of future suffering that may be caused. To
preserve the happiness ofothers, respect the rights and commit­
ments of others. Be fully aware of the responsibility of bringing
new lives into the world. Meditate on the world into which you
are bringing new beings.
                           The River
Once upon a time there was a beautiful river finding her way
among the hills, forests, and meadows. She began by being a joy­
ful stream of water, a spring always dancing and singing as she
ran down from the top of the mountain. She was very young at
the time, and as she came to the lowland she slowed down. She
was thinking about going to the ocean. As she grew up, she
learned to look beautiful, winding gracefully among the hills
and meadows.
   One day she noticed the clouds within herself. Clouds of all
sorts of colors and forms. She did nothing during these days but
chase after clouds. She wanted to possess a cloud, to have one for
herself. But clouds float and travel in the sky, and they are always
changing their form. Sometimes they look like an overcoat,
                                 1 30


P E A C E             I   S    E V E R Y             S T E P
sometimes like a horse. Because of the nature of impermanence
within the clouds, the river suffered very much. Her pleasure,
her joy had become just chasing after clouds, one after another,
but despair, anger, and hatred became her life.
    Then one day a strong wind came and blew away all the
clouds in the sky. The sky became completely empty. Our river
thought that life was not worth living, for there were no longer
any clouds to chase after. She wanted to die. "If there are no
clouds, why should I be alive? " But how can a river take her own
life?
    That night the river had the opportunity to go back to herself
for the first time. She had been running for so long after some­
thing outside of herself that she had never seen herself. That
night was the first opportunity for her to hear her own crying,
the sounds of water crashing against the banks of the river. Be­
cause she was able to listen to her own voice, she discovered
something quite important.
    She realized that what she had been looking for was already
in herself. She found out that clouds are nothing but water.
Clouds are born from water and will return to water. And she
found out that she herself is also water.
    The next morning when the sun was in the sky, she discovered
something beautiful. She saw the blue sky for the first time. She
had never noticed it before. She had only been interested in
clouds, and she had missed seeing the sky, which is the home of
all the clouds. Clouds are impermanent, but the sky is stable. She
realized that the immense sky had been within her heart since
the very beginning. This great insight brought her peace and


T    H    I   e    H       N    H    A    T     H    A   N    H
happiness. As she saw the vast wonderful blue sky, she knew that
her peace and stability would never be lost again.
   That afternoon the clouds returned, but this time she did not
want to possess any of them. She could see the beauty of each
cloud, and she was able to welcome all of them. When a cloud
came by, she would greet him or her with loving kindness.
When that cloud wanted to go away, she would wave to him or
her happily and with loving kindness. She realized that all
clouds are her. She didn't have to choose between the clouds and
herself. Peace and harmony existed between her and the clouds.
   That evening something wonderful happened. When she
opened her heart completely to the evening sky she received the
image of the full moon-beautiful, round, like a jewel within
herself. She had never imagined that she could receive such a
beautiful image. There is a very beautiful poem in Chinese:
"The fresh and beautiful moon is travelling in the utmost empty
sky. When the mind-rivers of living beings are free, that image
of the beautiful moon will reflect in each of us."
   This was the mind of the river at that moment. She received
the image of that beautiful moon within her heart, and water,
clouds, and moon took each other's hands and practiced walk­
ing meditation slowly, slowly to the ocean.
   There is nothing to chase after. We can go back to ourselves,
enjoy our breathing, our smiling, ourselves, and our beautiful
environment.


P E A C E              I S       E V E R Y              S T E P
                          Entering the
                 Twenty-First Century
The word "policy" is very much in use these days. There seems
to be a policy for just about everything. I have heard that the so­
called developed nations are contemplating a garbage policy to
send their trash on huge barges to the Third World.
   I think that we need a "policy" for dealing with our suffering.
We do not want to condone it, but we need to find a way to make
use of our suffering, for our good and for the good of others.
There has been so much suffering in the twentieth century: two
world wars, concentration camps in Europe, the killing fields of
Cambodia, refugees from Vietnam, Central America, and else­
where fleeing their countries with no place to land. We need to
articulate a policy for these kinds ofgarbage also. We need to use
the suffering of the twentieth century as compost, so that to­
gether we can create flowers for the twenty-first century.
   When we see photographs and programs about the atrocities
ofthe Nazis, the gas chambers and the camps, we feel afraid. We
may say, "I didn't do it; they did it." But if we had been there, we
may have done the same thing, or we may have been too cow­
ardly to stop it, as was the case for so many. We have to put all
these things into our compost pile to fertilize the ground. In Ger­
many today, the young people have a kind of complex that they


T     H    I   e    H      N    H     A   T     H    A     N   H
are somehow responsible for the suffering. It is important that
these young people and the generation responsible for the war
begin anew, and together create a path ofmindfulness so that our
children in the next century can avoid repeating the same mis­
takes. The flower of tolerance to see and appreciate cultural di­
versity is one flower we can cultivate for the children of the
twenty -first century. Another flower is the truth of suffering­
there has been so much unnecessary suffering in our century. If
we are willing to work together and learn together, we can all
benefit from the mistakes of our time, and, seeing with the eyes
of compassion and understanding, we can offer the next century
a beautiful garden and a clear path.
    'fake the hand of your child and invite her to go out and sit
with you on the grass. The two of you may want to contemplate
the green grass, the little flowers that grow among the grasses,
and the sky. Breathing and smiling together-that is peace ed­
ucation. If we know how to appreciate these beautiful things, we
will not have to search for anything else. Peace is available in
every moment, in every breath, in every step.
    I have enjoyed our journey together. I hope you have enjoyed
it too. We shall see each other again.


                          About the Author
Thich Nhat Hanh was born in central Vietnam in 1926, and he left
home as a teenager to become a Zen monk. In Vietnam, he founded
the School of Youth for Social Service, Van Hanh Buddhist Univer­
sity, and the Tiep Hien Order (Order of Interbeing). He has taught at
Columbia University and the Sorbonne, was Chair of the Vietnamese
Buddhist Peace Delegation to the Paris Peace Talks, and was nomi­
nated by Martin Luther King, Jr. for the Nobel Peace Prize. Since
1966, he has lived in exile in France, where he continues his writing,
teaching, gardening, and helping refugees worldwide. He is the au­
thor of seventy-five books in English, French, and Vietnamese,
including   Being Peace, The Miracle of Mindfulness, and The Sun My
Heart.
                           About the Editor
Arnold Kotler was an ordained student at the San Francisco and Tas­
sajara Zen Centers from 1969 to 1984. He is the founding editor of
Parallax Press, a publishing company in Berkeley, California, dedi­
cated to producing books and tapes on mindful awareness and social
responsibility, including the works of Thich Nhat Hanh.
For a catalogue of books and tapes by Thich Nhat Hanh, or a current
schedule of Thich Nhat Hanh's lectures and retreats worldwide,
please contact:
                              Parallax Press
                              P.O. Box 7355
                       Berkeley, California 94707




                             Table of Contents
Title Page
Copyright Page
BOOK ONE
Chapter One - Walking Just to Walk
Chapter Two - Tending Water Buffaloes
Chapter Three - An Armful of Kusa Grass
Chapter Four - The Wounded Swan
Chapter Five - A Bowl of Milk
Chapter Six - Beneath a Rose-Apple Tree
Chapter Seven - White Elephant Prize
Chapter Eight - The Jewelled Necklace
Chapter Nine - The Path of Compassion
Chapter Ten - Unborn Child
Chapter Eleven - Moonlight Flute
Chapter Twelve - Kanthaka
Chapter Thirteen - Beginning Spiritual Practice
Chapter Fourteen - Crossing the Ganga
Chapter Fifteen - Forest Ascetic
Chapter Sixteen - Was Yasodhara Sleeping?
Chapter Seventeen - Pippala Leaf
Chapter Eighteen - The Morning Star Has Risen
Chapter Nineteen - Tangerine of Mindfulness
Chapter Twenty - The Deer
Chapter Twenty-One - The Lotus Pond
Chapter Twenty-Two - Turning the Wheel of Dharma
Chapter Twenty-Three - Dharma Nectar
Chapter Twenty-Four - Taking Refuge
Chapter Twenty-Five - Music’s Lofty Peaks
Chapter Twenty-Six - Water Rises, Too
Chapter Twenty-Seven - All Dharmas Are on Fire


Chapter Twenty-Eight - Palm Forest
Chapter Twenty-Nine - Dependent Co-Arising
BOOK TWO
Chapter Thirty - Bamboo Forest
Chapter Thirty-One - I Will Return in the Spring
Chapter Thirty-Two - The Finger Is Not the Moon
Chapter Thirty-Three - Beauty That Does Not Fade
Chapter Thirty-Four - Reunion
Chapter Thirty-Five - Early Morning Sunshine
Chapter Thirty-Six - Lotus Vow
Chapter Thirty-Seven - A New Faith
Chapter Thirty-Eight - O, Happiness!
Chapter Thirty-Nine - Waiting for Daybreak
Chapter Forty - Cover the Land in Gold
Chapter Forty-One - Has Anyone Seen My Mother?
Chapter Forty-Two - Love Is Understanding
Chapter Forty-Three - Everyone’s Tears Are Salty
Chapter Forty-Four - The Elements Will Recombine
Chapter Forty-Five - Opening the Door
Chapter Forty-Six - A Handful of Simsapa Leaves
Chapter Forty-Seven - Follow the Dharma
Chapter Forty-Eight - Covering Mud with Straw
Chapter Forty-Nine - Earth’s Lessons
Chapter Fifty - A Handful of Bran
Chapter Fifty-One - The Treasure of Insight
Chapter Fifty-Two - Fields of Merit
Chapter Fifty-Three - Dwelling in the Present Moment
Chapter Fifty-Four - Dwell in Mindfulness
Chapter Fifty-Five - Appearance of the Morning Star
BOOK THREE
Chapter Fifty-Six - Full Awareness of Breathing


Chapter Fifty-Seven - The Raft Is Not the Shore
Chapter Fifty-Eight - A Handful of Precious Earth
Chapter Fifty-Nine - The Net of Theories
Chapter Sixty - Lady Visakha’s Grief
Chapter Sixty-One - The Lion’s Roar
Chapter Sixty-Two - Sariputta’s Roar
Chapter Sixty-Three - All the Way to the Sea
Chapter Sixty-Four - The Round of Birth and Death
Chapter Sixty-Five - Neither Full nor Empty
Chapter Sixty-Six - Four Mountains
Chapter Sixty-Seven - Ocean Poet
Chapter Sixty-Eight - Three Wondrous Gates
Chapter Sixty-Nine - Where Will the Buddha Go?
Chapter Seventy - The Quail and the Falcon
Chapter Seventy-One - The Art of Stringing a Sitar
Chapter Seventy-Two - Quiet Resistance
Chapter Seventy-Three - Hidden Rice
Chapter Seventy-Four - Cry of the Elephant Queen
Chapter Seventy-Five - Tears of Happiness
Chapter Seventy-Six - The Fruits of Practice
Chapter Seventy-Seven - Stars in Your Eyes
Chapter Seventy-Eight - Two Thousand Saffron Robes
Chapter Seventy-Nine - Sandalwood Tree Mushrooms
Chapter Eighty - Be Diligent!
Chapter Eighty-One - Old Path White Clouds
Appendix - Chapter Contents & Sources






              Copyright © 1991, by Thich Nhat Hanh
              Drawings © 1991, by Nguyen Thi Hop
                        All Rights Reserved
                          Printed in U.S.A.
                           Parallax Press
                           P.O. Box 7355
                    Berkeley, California 94707
           Translated from the Vietnamese by Mobi Ho.
                  Drawings by Nguyen Thi Hop.
             Map and Cover Design by Gay Reineck.
             Photo on back cover by James D. Gollin.
   Composed on Macintosh in Palatino 10/13 by Parallax Press.
         Linotronic Output at ProPer Publishing, Berkeley.
      Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
                         Nhât Hanh, Thich
                 [Duòng xua may trang: English]
  Old path white clouds : walking in the footsteps of the Buddha /
                         Thich Nhat Hanh.
                               p. cm.
               Translation of Duòng xua may trang.
                Includes bibliographical references.
ISBN 0-938077-40-6 : $40.00—ISBN 0-938077-26-0 (pbk.) : $25.00
                    1. Gautama Buddha. I. Title
                        BQ882.N4813 1991
                     294.3’63—dc20 90-21483
                                 CIP
                           9 10 / 01 00 99


                  Books by the Same Author
                          Being Peace
                    Breathe! You Are Alive
                A Guide to Walking Meditation
                 The Heart of Understanding
                           Interbeing
                  The Miracle of Mindfulness
                      The Moon Bamboo
                  Our Appointment with Life
                         The Pine Gate
              Present Moment Wonderful Moment
                    A Rose for Your Pocket
                      The Sun My Heart
   The Sutra on the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings
                  Transformation & Healing
                           Zen Poems
One dollar from the sale of each copy of Old Path White Clouds
     will be donated to organizations which help children
           in India and other Third World countries.


BOOK ONE

                                Chapter One
                            Walking Just to Walk
Under the shadows of the green bamboo, the young bhikkhu, Svasti, sat cross-
legged, concentrating on his breath. He had been meditating for more than an
hour in the Bamboo Forest Monastery, while hundreds of other bhikkhus were
also practicing under the shade of the bamboo trees or in their own thatched
huts.
   The great teacher Gautama, whom people affectionately called the “Buddha,”
lived in the monastery with nearly four hundred disciples. Although crowded, it
was very peaceful. Forty acres surrounded the monastery, and many varieties of
graceful bamboo from all over Magadha were planted there. Just a thirty
minutes’ walk north of the capital city of Rajagaha, the Bamboo Forest
Monastery had been given to Buddha and his community by King Bimbisara
seven years earlier.
   Svasti rubbed his eyes and smiled. His legs were still tender as he slowly
uncrossed them. Twenty-one years old, he had been ordained three days earlier
by the Venerable Sariputta, one of the Buddha’s senior disciples. During the
ordination ceremony, Svasti’s thick brown hair was shaved off.
Svasti was very happy to be part of the Buddha’s community. Many bhikkhus
were of noble birth, such as the Venerable Nanda, the Buddha’s brother, and
Devadatta, Anuruddha, and Ananda. Although Svasti had not yet been
introduced to these men, he had noticed them from afar. Even in faded robes,
their noble bearing was unmistakable.
   “It will be a long time before I can be friends with men of such noble birth,”
thought Svasti. And yet, even though the Buddha himself was the son of a king,
Svasti felt no gulf between them. Svasti was an “untouchable,” lower than the
lowest and poorest caste according to the system of discrimination among the


people of India at that time. For more than ten years, he had tended water
buffalo, but for two weeks now, he was living and practicing with monks from
all castes. Everyone was very kind to him, offering him warm smiles and deep
bows, but he did not yet feel at ease. He suspected it might take years before he
could feel completely comfortable.
   Suddenly, a broad smile emerged from deep within him, as he thought of
Rahula, the Buddha’s eighteen-year-old son. Rahula had been a novice in the
community since the age of ten, and in just two weeks Rahula and Svasti had
become best friends. It was Rahula who taught Svasti how to follow his breath
during meditation. Rahula understood the Buddha’s teachings well, even though
he was not yet a bhikkhu. He needed to wait until he was twenty before he could
receive full ordination.
Svasti reflected on the time, just two weeks before, when the Buddha came to
Uruvela, his small village near Gaya, to invite him to become a monk. When the
Buddha arrived at his home, Svasti was out with his brother, Rupak, taking care
of the buffaloes. His two sisters, Bala, age sixteen, and Bhima, age twelve, were
there, and Bala recognized the Buddha right away. She began to run out to find
Svasti, but the Buddha told her it wasn’t necessary. He said that he and the
monks traveling with him, including Rahula, would walk to the river to find her
brother. It was late afternoon when they came upon Svasti and Rupak scrubbing
down their nine buffaloes in the Neranjara River. As soon as they saw the
Buddha, the young men ran up the bank of the river, joined their palms to form a
lotus bud, and bowed deeply.
   “You’ve grown so much,” the Buddha said, smiling warmly at Svasti and his
brother. Svasti was speechless. Seeing the Buddha’s peaceful face, his warm and
generous smile, and his brilliant, penetrating eyes, moved him to tears. The
Buddha wore a saffron robe made of patches sewn together in the pattern of a
rice field. He still walked barefoot as he had ten years before, when Svasti first
met him not far from this very spot. Ten years before they had spent hours sitting
together on the banks of the Neranjara and beneath the shade of the bodhi tree,
just ten minutes’ walk from the riverbank.
   Svasti glanced at the twenty bhikkhus behind the Buddha and saw that they,
too, were barefoot and clad in patched robes of the same color. Looking more


closely, Svasti saw that the Buddha’s robe was a hand-length longer than those
of the others. Standing next to the Buddha was a novice about Svasti’s age who
looked at him directly and smiled. Buddha gently placed his hands on Svasti and
Rupak’s heads and told them he had stopped by to visit on his way back to
Rajagaha. He said he would be happy to wait while Svasti and Rupak finished
bathing the buffaloes so they could all walk to Svasti’s thatched hut together.
   During the walk back, Buddha introduced Svasti and Rupak to his son Rahula,
the young novice who had smiled so beautifully at Svasti. Rahula was three
years younger than Svasti, but they were the same height. Rahula was a
samanera, a novice, but he dressed much the same as the older bhikkhus. Rahula
walked between Svasti and Rupak, handing his alms bowl to Rupak and placing
his arms lovingly around the shoulders of his two new friends. He had heard so
much about Svasti and his family from his father that he felt he already knew
them. The brothers basked in the warmth of Rahula’s love.
   As soon as they arrived at Svasti’s home, the Buddha invited him to join the
bhikkhu community and study the Dharma with him. Ten years earlier, when
Svasti had first met the Buddha, he expressed his wish to study with him, and the
Buddha had agreed to accept Svasti as a disciple. Now that Svasti was twenty-
one, the Buddha had returned. He had not forgotten his promise.
   Rupak led the buffaloes back to Mr. Rambhul, their owner. The Buddha sat
outside Svasti’s hut, on a small stool, while the bhikkhus stood behind him. With
earthen walls and a thatched roof, Svasti’s tiny home was not large enough for
everyone to come inside. Bala told Svasti, “Brother, please go with the Buddha.
Rupak is even stronger than you were when you began tending the buffaloes,
and I am quite capable of taking care of the house. You have looked after us for
ten years, and now we are ready to be on our own.”
   Sitting next to the rainwater barrel, Bhima looked up at her big sister without
saying a word. Svasti looked at Bhima. She was a lovely young girl. When
Svasti met the Buddha, Bala was six years old, Rupak three, and Bhima only an
infant. Bala cooked for the family while Rupak played in the sand.
   Six months following their father’s death, their mother passed away in
childbirth. Just eleven years old, Svasti became the head of the household. He
found a job tending water buffaloes, and because Svasti was a good worker, he
earned enough to feed his family. He was even able to bring buffalo milk home
for little Bhima.
   Realizing that Svasti was asking her about her feelings, Bhima smiled. She
hesitated a moment and then spoke softly, “Brother, go with the Buddha.” She


turned her face away to hide the tears. Bhima had heard Svasti mention his wish
to study with Buddha so many times and she truly wanted him to go, but now
that the moment had arrived she could not hide her sadness.
               The Buddha sat outside Svasti’s hut, on a small stool.
   Just then, Rupak returned from the village, and hearing Bhima’s words, “Go
with the Buddha,” he understood that the time had come. He looked at Svasti
and said, “Yes, brother, please go with the Buddha,” and the whole family fell


silent. Rupak looked at the Buddha and said, “Venerable Sir, I hope you will
permit my brother to study with you. I am old enough to care for our family.”
Rupak turned to Svasti and, holding back his tears, said, “But brother, please ask
the Buddha if you can come back and visit us from time to time.”
   The Buddha stood up and gently stroked Bhima’s hair. “Children, please eat
now. Tomorrow morning, I will return for Svasti so we can walk together to
Rajagaha. The bhikkhus and I will rest beneath the bodhi tree tonight.”
   As the Buddha reached the gate, he looked back at Svasti and said,
“Tomorrow morning, you do not need to bring anything. The clothes you are
wearing are enough.”
   That night the four siblings stayed up late. Like a departing father, Svasti gave
them his last advice on taking care of each other and the household. He
embraced each of them for a long time. Unable to hold back her tears, little
Bhima sobbed while her oldest brother held her. But then she looked up,
breathed deeply, and smiled at him. She didn’t want Svasti to feel sad. The oil
lamp cast a dim light, but it was enough for Svasti to see her smile, and he
appreciated it.
   Early the next morning, Sujata, Svasti’s friend, came to say goodbye. The
evening before, she had seen the Buddha when she was on her way to the
riverbank, and he told her that Svasti would be joining the order of monks.
Sujata, the daughter of the village head, was two years older than Svasti, and
she, too, had met Gautama before he became the Buddha. Sujata gave Svasti a
small jar of herbal medicines to take with him. They spoke only briefly, and then
the Buddha and his disciples arrived.
   Svasti’s brother and sisters were already awake to see their brother off. Rahula
spoke gently to each of them, encouraging them to be strong and to take care of
each other. He promised that whenever he was nearby, he would stop in Uruvela
to visit them. Svasti’s family and Sujata walked with the Buddha and the
bhikkhus to the riverbank, and there they joined their palms to say goodbye to
the Buddha, the monks, Rahula, and Svasti.
   Svasti was overcome with both fear and joy. There was a knot in his stomach.
This was the first time he had ever left Uruvela. The Buddha said it would take
ten days to reach Rajagaha. Most people traveled more quickly, but the Buddha
and his bhikkhus walked slowly and with great ease. As Svasti’s pace slowed
down, his heart quieted. He was wholeheartedly immersing himself in the
Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha, and this was his path. He turned around
for one last glimpse of the only land and people he knew, and he saw Sujata and


his family as mere specks merging with the shadows of the forest trees.
   It seemed to Svasti that the Buddha walked just to enjoy the walking,
unconcerned about arriving anywhere at all. So it was with all the bhikkhus. No
one seemed anxious or impatient to reach their destination. Each man’s steps
were slow, balanced, and peaceful. It was as if they were taking a pleasant stroll
together. No one ever appeared tired, and yet they covered a good distance each
day.
   Each morning they would stop in the nearest village to beg for food. They
walked along the streets in a single line with the Buddha at the head. Svasti came
last, just behind Rahula. They walked with quiet dignity, observing each breath
and each step. Once in a while, they would stop while villagers placed offerings
of food in their bowls. Some villagers knelt by the side of the road in respect. As
the bhikkhus received the food, they quietly recited prayers for the people.
   When they finished begging, they slowly left the village to find a place
beneath some trees or in a grassy meadow where they could eat. They sat in a
circle and divided the food equally, careful to fill anyone’s bowl that was still
empty. Rahula filled a jug with water from a nearby stream and respectfully
carried it to the Buddha. After the Buddha joined his palms together to form
what looked like a lotus flower, Rahula poured the water over the Buddha’s
hands and rinsed them clean. He did the same for everyone else, coming last to
Svasti. As Svasti did not yet have a bowl, Rahula placed half of his own food on
a fresh banana leaf and gave it to his new friend. Before eating, the bhikkhus
joined their palms and chanted together. Then they ate in silence, mindful of
each bite.
   When they finished, some bhikkhus practiced walking meditation, some did
sitting meditation, and others took a short nap. When the hottest part of the day
had passed, they took to the road again, and they walked until it was nearly dark.
The best places to rest for the night were undisturbed forests, and they walked
until they found a good place. Each bhikkhu had his own cushion, and many sat
cross-legged in the lotus position for half the night before spreading out their
robes and going to sleep. Each bhikkhu carried two robes, the one he was
wearing and another to use as protection against wind and cold. Svasti sat in
meditation like the others and learned to sleep upon the earth using a tree root
for a pillow.
   When Svasti awoke the next morning, he saw the Buddha and many of the
bhikkhus already sitting peacefully in meditation, radiating profound calm and
majesty. As soon as the sun rose over the horizon, each bhikkhu folded his extra


robe, picked up his bowl, and began the day’s journey.
   Walking by day and resting by night, it was ten days before they reached
Rajagaha, the capital of Magadha. It was the first time Svasti had seen a city.
Horse carts pressed through streets lined with crowded dwellings; shouts and
laughter echoed everywhere. But the silent procession of the bhikkhus
continued, as peacefully as when they strolled along the quiet riverbanks or
between country rice fields. A few of the city dwellers paused to watch them,
and a few, recognizing the Buddha, bowed deeply to show their respect. The
bhikkhus continued their calm procession until they reached the Bamboo Forest
Monastery, just beyond the city.
   News spread quickly throughout the monastery that the Buddha had returned,
and within moments, nearly four hundred bhikkhus gathered to welcome him
back. The Buddha did not say much but asked about everyone’s well-being and
meditation practice. He entrusted Svasti to Sariputta, who was also Rahula’s
spiritual instructor. Sariputta was the novice master of Bamboo Forest
Monastery and watched over the studies of nearly fifty young monks, all of
whom had been in the community for less than three years. The abbot of the
monastery was a monk named Kondanna.
   Rahula was asked to introduce Svasti to the ways of monastery life—how to
walk, sit, stand, greet others, do walking and sitting meditation, and observe his
breathing. He also showed Svasti how to wear the monk’s robe, beg for food,
recite prayers, and wash his bowl. For three continuous days, Svasti did not
leave Rahula’s side, so that he could learn these things well. Rahula put his
whole heart into instructing Svasti, yet Svasti knew it would take years of
practicing before he would be able to do these things in a relaxed and natural
way. After this basic instruction, Sariputta invited Svasti into his hut and
explained the precepts of a bhikkhu.
   A bhikkhu was one who left his family in order to follow the Buddha as a
teacher, the Dharma as the path which leads to awakening, and the Sangha as the
community that supports one along the path. A bhikkhu’s life was simple and
humble. Begging for food helped foster humility and was also a means to be in
contact with others and help them see the Way of Love and Understanding which
the Buddha taught.
   Ten years earlier beneath the bodhi tree, Svasti and his friends had listened to
the Buddha speak about the path of awakening as the path of love and
understanding, so it was easy for him to grasp all that Sariputta told him. Though
Sariputta’s face appeared serious, his eyes and smile radiated great warmth and


compassion. He told Svasti that there would be a precepts ceremony to formally
accept him into the community of bhikkhus, and he taught Svasti the words he
would need to recite.
   Sariputta himself presided over the precepts ceremony. About twenty
bhikkhus attended. The Buddha and Rahula were there, adding to Svasti’s
happiness. Sariputta silently recited a gatha, and then shaved off several locks of
Svasti’s hair. He then gave the razor to Rahula, who completed the task of
shaving Svasti’s head. Sariputta gave Svasti three robes, a bowl, and a water
filter. Because he had already been taught by Rahula how to wear the robe,
Svasti put it on without difficulty. He bowed before the Buddha and the other
bhikkhus present to express his deep gratitude.
   Later that morning, Svasti practiced begging for the first time as an ordained
bhikkhu. The monks of Bamboo Forest Monastery walked into Rajagaha in
several small groups, and Svasti was part of the group led by Sariputta. After
taking just a few steps out of the monastery, Svasti reminded himself that
begging was a vehicle to practice the Way. He observed his breathing and took
each step quietly and in mindfulness. Rahula walked behind him. Although he
was now a bhikkhu, Svasti knew that he had considerably less experience than
Rahula. He resolved with all his heart to nurture humility and virtue within
himself.


                                Chapter Two
                           Tending Water Buffaloes
The day was cool. After eating the noon meal in mindfulness, each bhikkhu
washed his own bowl and placed his cushion on the earth to sit facing the
Buddha. The many squirrels that lived in Bamboo Forest mingled freely with the
monks, and some climbed up into bamboo trees to gaze down at the gathering.
Svasti saw Rahula sitting directly in front of the Buddha, and he quietly tiptoed
there and placed his cushion next to Rahula’s. They sat together in the lotus
position. In that serene and dignified atmosphere, no one spoke. Svasti knew that
each bhikkhu was following his breath mindfully, waiting for the Buddha to
speak.
   The Buddha’s bamboo platform was high enough for everyone to see him
clearly. The Buddha had a relaxed yet majestic air like that of a lion prince. His
eyes filled with loving compassion as he looked out over the assembly. When his
eyes came to rest on Svasti and Rahula, the Buddha smiled and began to speak:
   “Today I wish to tell you about the work of tending water buffaloes—what a
good buffalo boy must know and what he must be able to do. A boy who cares
well for water buffaloes is a boy who easily recognizes each buffalo under his
care, knows the characteristics and tendencies of each one, knows how to scrub
them, care for their wounds, chase mosquitoes away with smoke, find safe paths
for them to walk, love them, find safe and shallow places for them to cross the
river, seek fresh grass and water for them, preserve the grazing meadows, and let
the older buffaloes serve as good models for the younger ones.
   “Listen Bhikkhus, just as a buffalo boy recognizes each of his own buffaloes,
a bhikkhu recognizes each of the essential elements of his own body. Just as a
buffalo boy knows the characteristics and tendencies of each buffalo, a bhikkhu
knows which actions of body, speech, and mind are worthy and which are not.
Just as a buffalo boy scrubs his animals clean, a bhikkhu must cleanse his mind
and body of desires, attachments, anger, and aversions.”
   As he spoke, the Buddha’s eyes did not leave Svasti. Svasti felt that he himself
was the source of the Buddha’s words. He recalled how, years before, while
sitting at the Buddha’s side, the Buddha would ask him to describe in detail his


work of tending water buffaloes. How else could a prince raised in a palace
know so much about buffaloes?
   Though the Buddha spoke in a normal voice, each sound rose clear and
distinct and no one missed a word: “Just as a buffalo boy cares for his buffaloes’
wounds, a bhikkhu watches over his six sense organs—eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body, and mind—so that they do not become lost in dispersion. Just as a buffalo
boy protects his buffaloes from mosquito bites by building fires to create smoke,
the bhikkhu uses the teaching of becoming awake to show those around him how
to avoid the afflictions of body and mind. Just as the boy finds a safe path for the
buffaloes to walk, the bhikkhu avoids those paths that lead to desire for fame,
wealth, and sexual pleasure—places such as taverns and theaters. Just as a
buffalo boy loves his buffaloes, the bhikkhu cherishes the joy and peace of
meditation. As the boy finds a safe, shallow place in the river for the buffaloes to
cross, the bhikkhu relies on the Four Noble Truths to negotiate this life. As the
boy finds fresh grass and water for his buffaloes, the bhikkhu knows that the
Four Establishments of Mindfulness are the nourishment leading to liberation.
As the boy preserves the fields by not overgrazing them, the bhikkhu is careful
to preserve the relationships with the nearby community as he begs offerings. As
the boy lets the older buffaloes serve as models for the younger ones, the
bhikkhu depends on the wisdom and experience of their elders. O bhikkhus, a
bhikkhu who follows these eleven points will attain arhatship in the span of six
years of practice.”
“As a buffalo boy finds fresh grass for his buffaloes, so a bhikkhu knows that the
Four Establishments of Mindfulness lead to liberation.”


   Svasti listened in astonishment. The Buddha had remembered everything he
had told him ten years before, and was able to apply each detail to a bhikkhu’s
practice. Though Svasti knew the Buddha was teaching the entire assembly of
monks, he also had the distinct impression that the Buddha was addressing him
directly. The young man’s eyes did not wander even once from the Buddha’s
countenance.
   These were words to hold in one’s heart. Of course, there were terms such as
“six sense organs,” “Four Noble Truths,” “Four Establishments of Mindfulness,”
which Svasti did not yet understand. He would ask Rahula later to explain these
terms, but he knew he understood the essential meaning of the Buddha’s words.


   Buddha continued to speak. He told the assembly about choosing a safe path
for the buffaloes to walk. If the path was overgrown with thorns, the buffaloes
would get cuts which could become infected. If the buffalo boy did not know
how to take care of wounds, his buffaloes could become feverish and even die.
Practicing the Way was the same. If a bhikkhu did not find a proper path, he
could become wounded in mind and body. Greed and anger could further poison
his wounds until they grew so infected that the way to enlightenment became
hindered.
   The Buddha paused. He motioned for Svasti to come up and stand beside him.
Svasti stood with his palms joined while Buddha, smiling, introduced Svasti to
the assembly:
   “Ten years ago I met Svasti in the forest near Gaya, just before I realized the
Way. He was then eleven years old. It was Svasti who gathered armfuls of kusa
grass which I used for a cushion to sit beneath the bodhi tree. Everything I have
taught about water buffaloes, I learned from him. I knew he was a good buffalo
boy, and I know he will be a fine bhikkhu.”
   Everyone’s eyes were on Svasti, and he could feel his ears and cheeks tingling
and becoming very red. The men all joined their palms and bowed to him, and
he bowed back to them. The Buddha then concluded the Dharma talk by asking
Rahula to recite the sixteen methods of conscious breathing. Rahula stood,
placed his palms together, and recited each method in a voice as bright and clear
as a bell. When he finished, he bowed to the community, and the Buddha stood
up and slowly walked back to his hut. After he did so, all the monks in the
assembly took their own cushions and walked slowly to their own spot in the
forest. Some of the monks lived in huts, but many slept and meditated outdoors,
beneath the bamboo trees. Only when it rained very hard did they pick up their
cushions and seek shelter in the residential huts or lecture halls.
   Svasti’s teacher, Sariputta, had assigned him to share a space outdoors with
Rahula. When Rahula was younger, he had to sleep in a hut with the teacher who
served as his guardian, but now he had a spot under the trees. Svasti was happy
to be with Rahula.
   Late that afternoon after sitting meditation, Svasti practiced walking
meditation alone. He selected an empty path to avoid encountering others, but he
found it difficult to remain concentrated on his breathing. His thoughts were
filled with longing for his brother and sisters and the village at home. The image
of the path leading to the Neranjara River rose clearly in his mind. He saw little
Bhima lowering her head to hide her tears and Rupak caring for Rambhul’s


water buffaloes alone. He tried to chase these images away and focus on nothing
but his steps and breathing, but the images continued to flood him. He felt
ashamed that he could not devote himself to his practice, and he felt unworthy of
the Buddha’s trust. After walking meditation, he thought, he would ask Rahula
for help. There were also several things the Buddha had said in his Dharma talk
that morning that he had not fully grasped, and he was sure Rahula could explain
them to him. Just thinking about Rahula encouraged and calmed him, and he
found it easier to follow his breathing and each slow step.
   Svasti had not yet had a chance to look for Rahula, when Rahula came
looking for him. He led Svasti to a seat beneath a bamboo tree, and said, “This
afternoon I met the elder Ananda. He would like to hear all about how you first
met the Buddha.”
   “Who is Ananda, Rahula?”
   “He’s a prince of the Sakya line and the Buddha’s cousin. He became a monk
seven years ago and now he is one of the best disciples. The Buddha loves him
dearly. It is he who looks after the master’s health. Ananda has invited us to
come to his hut tomorrow evening. I too want to hear all about the time the
Buddha was living in the Gaya Forest.”
   “Hasn’t the Buddha already told you?”
   “Yes, but not in detail. I’m sure you have a lot of stories to tell.”
   “Well, there isn’t really much, but I will tell all I remember. Rahula, what is
Ananda like? I feel a little nervous.”
   “Don’t worry. He’s very kind and friendly. I told him about you and your
family, and he was delighted. Shall we meet in this spot tomorrow morning when
we go begging for food? Now I must wash my robe so it will be dry in time.”
   As Rahula stood to leave, Svasti tugged lightly at his robe, “Can you sit for
just a while longer? There are some things I want to ask you. This morning the
Buddha spoke about eleven points a bhikkhu must follow, but I can’t recall all
eleven. Can you repeat them for me?”
   “I can only remember nine myself. But don’t worry, tomorrow we can ask
Ananda.”
   “Are you sure the elder Ananda will remember all of them?”
   “Positive! If it had been one hundred eleven, Ananda would still remember.
You don’t know Ananda yet, but everyone here admires his memory. It’s
incredible. He can repeat flawlessly everything the Buddha has said without
leaving out even one tiny detail. Around here, everyone calls him the most
learned of all the Buddha’s disciples. So whenever someone forgets something


the Buddha has said, they seek out Ananda. Sometimes the community organizes
study sessions in which Ananda goes over the Buddha’s basic teachings.”
   “Then we’re very lucky. We’ll wait and ask him tomorrow. But there is
something else I want to ask you—how do you quiet your mind during walking
meditation?”
   “Do you mean to say that during your walking meditation other thoughts came
into your mind? Like thoughts of missing your family?”
   Svasti grasped his friend’s hand, “How did you know? That’s exactly what
happened! I don’t know why I miss my family so much this evening. I feel
terrible, but I don’t seem to have enough resolve to practice the Way. I feel
ashamed before you and the Buddha.”
   Rahula smiled. “Don’t be ashamed. When I first joined the Buddha, I missed
my mother, my grandfather, and my aunt. Many nights I buried my face in my
cushion and cried alone. I knew that my mother, grandfather and aunt missed
me, too. But after a while, it was better.”
   Rahula helped Svasti up to a standing position and gave him a friendly hug.
   “Your brother and sisters are lovely. It’s only natural for you to miss them. But
you’ll get used to your new life. We’ve got lots of work to do here—we must
practice and study. But listen, when we get a chance, I’ll tell you about my
family, all right?”
   Svasti held Rahula’s hand in his own two hands and nodded. Then they
parted, Rahula to wash his robe and Svasti to find a broom to sweep the paths
clear of bamboo leaves.


                               Chapter Three
                          An Armful of Kusa Grass
Before falling asleep, Svasti sat beneath a bamboo tree and recalled the months
he had first met the Buddha. He was just eleven years old then, and his mother
had recently died, leaving him in charge of his three younger siblings. His
youngest sister, an infant, had no milk to drink. Luckily, a man in the village
named Rambhul hired Svasti to tend his water buffaloes—four grown buffaloes
and one calf. And so Svasti was able to milk a buffalo cow everyday and feed his
baby sister. He tended the water buffaloes with utmost care, for he knew that he
had to keep his job or his siblings would starve. Since his father’s death, their
roof had not been rethatched, and every time it rained, Rupak had to scurry about
placing stone jars beneath the gaping holes to catch the rainwater. Bala was only
six years old but had to learn to cook, care for her baby sister, and gather
firewood in the forest. Though just a small child, she could knead flour into
chappati bread for her siblings to eat. Rarely could they buy even a bit of curry
powder. When Svasti led the buffaloes back to their stable, the tantalizing
fragrance of curry drifting from Rambhul’s kitchen made his mouth water.
Chappati dipped in curry sauce cooked with meat had been an unknown luxury
since his father died. The children’s clothes were little more than rags. Svasti
owned but one worn dhoti. When it was cold he wrapped an old brown cloth
around his shoulders. It was threadbare and faded, but precious to him,
nonetheless.
   Svasti had to find good grazing spots for the buffaloes, for if he returned them
to their stable hungry, he knew he would be beaten by Mr. Rambhul. In addition,
he had to carry home a sizable bundle of grass every evening for the buffaloes to
eat throughout the night. On evenings when the mosquitoes were thick, Svasti lit
a fire to chase them away with the smoke. Rambhul paid him in rice, flour, and
salt every three days. Some days, Svasti was able to bring home a few fish that
he had caught along the edges of the Neranjara River for Bhima to cook.
   One afternoon, after he had bathed the buffaloes and cut a bushel of grass,
Svasti felt like spending a quiet moment alone in the cool forest. Leaving the
buffaloes grazing at the forest’s edge, Svasti looked about for a tall tree to rest


against. Suddenly he stopped. There was a man sitting silently beneath a pippala
tree, no more than twenty feet away. Svasti gazed at him in wonder. He had
never before seen anyone sit so beautifully. The man’s back was perfectly
straight, and his feet rested elegantly upon his thighs. He held himself with
utmost stability and inner purpose. His eyes appeared to be half-closed, and his
folded hands rested lightly on his lap. He wore a faded yellow robe which left
one shoulder bare. His body radiated peace, serenity, and majesty. Just one look
at him, and Svasti felt wondrously refreshed. His heart trembled. He did not
understand how he could feel something so special for a person he hadn’t even
met, but he stood immobile in utter respect for a long moment.
   Then the man opened his eyes. He did not see Svasti at first, as he uncrossed
his legs and gently massaged his ankles and the soles of his feet. Slowly he stood
up and began to walk. Because he walked in the opposite direction, he still did
not see Svasti. Without making a sound, Svasti watched the man take slow,
meditative steps along the forest floor. After seven or eight such steps, the man
turned around, and it was then that he noticed Svasti.
   He smiled at the boy. No one had ever smiled with such gentle tolerance at
Svasti before. As though drawn by an invisible force, Svasti ran towards the
man, but when he was within a few feet, he stopped in his tracks, remembering
that he had no right to approach anyone of higher caste.
   Svasti was an untouchable. He did not belong to any of the four social castes.
His father had explained to him that the brahmana caste was the highest, and
people born into this caste were priests and teachers who read and understood
the Vedas and other scriptures and made offerings to the gods. When Brahma
created the human race, the brahman issued from his mouth. The ksatriya were
the next highest caste. They could hold political and military positions, as they
had issued from Brahma’s two hands. Those of the vaisya caste were merchants,
farmers, and craftspeople who had sprung from Brahma’s thighs. Those of the
sudra caste had come from Brahma’s feet and were the lowest of the four castes.
They did only the manual labor not performed by the higher castes. But Svasti’s
family members were “untouchables,” those who had no caste at all. They were
required to build their homes outside of the village limits, and they did the
lowest kinds of work such as collecting garbage, spreading manure, digging
roads, feeding pigs, and tending water buffaloes. Everyone had to accept the
caste into which he or she was born. The sacred scriptures taught that happiness
was the ability to accept one’s position.
   If an untouchable like Svasti touched a person of a higher caste, he would be


beaten. In the village of Uruvela, an untouchable man had been beaten severely
for touching a brahman with his hand. A brahman or ksatriya touched by an
untouchable was considered polluted and had to return home to fast and do
penance for several weeks in order to cleanse himself. Whenever Svasti led the
buffaloes home, he took great pains not to pass near any person of high caste on
the road or outside Rambhul’s house. It seemed to Svasti that even the buffaloes
were more fortunate than he, because a brahman could touch a buffalo without
being polluted. Even if, through no fault of the untouchable, a person of higher
caste accidentally brushed against him, the untouchable could still be ruthlessly
beaten.
   Here, before Svasti, stood a most attractive man, and it was clear from his
bearing that he did not share the same social status. Surely someone with so kind
and tolerant a smile would not beat Svasti even if he did touch him, but Svasti
did not want to be the cause of pollution of someone so special, and that was
why he froze when he and the man were a few steps apart. Seeing Svasti’s
hesitation, the man stepped forward himself. Svasti stepped back to avoid
coming in contact with the man, but the man was quicker, and in the blink of an
eye had grasped Svasti by the shoulder with his left hand. With his right hand, he
gave Svasti a tender pat on the head. Svasti stood motionless. No one had ever
touched him on the head in so gentle and affectionate way, and yet he felt
suddenly panic-stricken.
   “Don’t be afraid, child,” the man said in a quiet and reassuring voice.
   At the sound of that voice, Svasti’s fears disappeared. He lifted his head and
gazed at the man’s kind and tolerant smile. After hesitating for a moment, he
stammered, “Sir, I like you very much.”
   The man lifted Svasti’s chin in his hand and looked into the boy’s eyes. “And I
like you also. Do you live nearby?”
   Svasti did not answer. He took the man’s left hand in his own two hands and
asked the question that was troubling him, “When I touch you like this, aren’t
you being polluted?”
   The man laughed and shook his head. “Not at all, child. You are a human
being and I am a human being. You can’t pollute me. Don’t listen to what people
tell you.”
   He took Svasti’s hand and walked with him to the edge of the forest. The
water buffaloes were still grazing peacefully. The man looked at Svasti and
asked, “Do you tend these buffaloes? And that must be the grass you have cut
for their dinner. What is your name? Is your house nearby?”


Svasti offered Siddhartha an armful of kusa grass to use as a cushion.
   Svasti answered politely, “Yes, Sir, I care for these four buffaloes and that one
calf, and that is the grass I cut. My name is Svasti and I live on the other side of
the river just beyond the village of Uruvela. Please, Sir, what is your name and
where do you live? Can you tell me?”
   The man answered kindly, “Certainly. My name is Siddhartha, and my home
is far away, but at present I am living in this forest.”


   “Are you a hermit?”
   Siddhartha nodded. Svasti knew that hermits were men who usually lived and
meditated up in the mountains.
   Though they had just met and exchanged no more than a few words, Svasti
felt a warm bond with his new friend. In Uruvela, no one had ever treated him in
so friendly a way or spoken to him with such warmth. A great happiness surged
within him, and he wanted to somehow express his joy. If only he had some gift
he could offer Siddhartha! But there was no penny in his pocket, not even a
piece of sugar cane or rock candy. What could he offer? He had nothing, but he
summoned the courage to say,
   “Mister, I wish I had something to give you as a gift, but I have nothing.”
   Siddhartha looked at Svasti and smiled. “But you do. You have something I
would like very much.”
   “I do?”
   Siddhartha pointed to the pile of kusa grass. “That grass you have cut for the
buffaloes is soft and fragrant. If you could give me a few handfuls I shall make a
sitting cushion for my meditation beneath the tree. That would make me very
happy.”
   Svasti’s eyes shone. He ran to the pile of grass, gathered a large bundle in his
thin arms, and offered it to Siddhartha.
   “I just cut this grass down by the river. Please accept it. I can easily cut more
for the buffaloes.”
   Siddhartha placed his hands together like a lotus bud and accepted the gift. He
said, “You are a very kind boy. I thank you. Go and cut some more grass for your
buffaloes before it grows too late. If you have a chance, please come and see me
tomorrow afternoon in the forest again.”
   Young Svasti bowed his head in farewell and stood watching as Siddhartha
disappeared back into the forest. Then he picked up his sickle and headed for the
shore, his heart filled with the warmest of feelings. It was early autumn. The
kusa grass was still soft and his sickle was newly sharpened. It wasn’t long at all
before Svasti had cut another large armful of kusa grass.
   Svasti led the buffaloes to Rambhul’s home, guiding them to cross a shallow
section of the Neranjara River. The calf was reluctant to leave the sweet grass
along the shore and Svasti had to coax her along. The bushel of grass on his
shoulder was not heavy and Svasti waded across the river together with the
buffaloes.


                                  Chapter Four
                               The Wounded Swan
Early the next morning, Svasti led his buffaloes to graze. By noon he had cut
enough grass to fill two baskets. Svasti liked to let the buffaloes graze on the
side of the river which bordered the forest. That way, when he finished gathering
grass, he could stretch out in the cool breeze and not worry about the buffaloes
wandering into someone’s rice fields. He carried only his sickle, the tool by
which he earned his living. Svasti opened the small fistful of rice Bala had
wrapped in a banana leaf for his lunch, but as he was about to eat, his thoughts
turned to Siddhartha.
   “I could take this rice to the hermit, Siddhartha,” he thought. “Surely he won’t
find my rice too humble.” Svasti wrapped the rice, and, leaving the buffaloes at
the forest’s edge, followed the path to where he had met Siddhartha the day
before.
   From a distance he saw his new friend sitting beneath the great pippala tree.
But Siddhartha was not alone. Before him sat a girl just about Svasti’s age,
dressed in a fine white sari. There was food already placed before him, and
Svasti stopped abruptly. But Siddhartha looked up and called to him, “Svasti!”
He motioned for the boy to join them.
   The girl in the white sari looked up, and Svasti recognized her as someone he
had often passed on the village road. As Svasti approached, she moved to her left
to make a place for him, and Siddhartha gestured him to sit down. In front of
Siddhartha was a banana leaf which held a fistful of rice and a small amount of
sesame salt. Siddhartha divided the rice into two portions.
   “Have you eaten yet, child?”
   “No, Mister, I haven’t.”
   “Well then, let’s share this.”
   Siddhartha handed Svasti half the rice, and Svasti joined his palms together in
thanks, but refused the rice. He took out his own humble rice and said, “I’ve also
brought some.”
   He opened his banana leaf to reveal coarse grains of brown rice, unlike the
soft white grains on Siddhartha’s leaf. He had no sesame salt. Siddhartha smiled


at the two children and said, “Shall we put all our rice together and share it?”
   He took half the white rice, dipped it in sesame salt and handed it to Svasti.
Then he broke off half of Svasti’s rice ball and began to eat it with obvious
delight. Svasti felt awkward, but seeing Siddhartha’s naturalness, he began to eat
as well.
   “Your rice is so fragrant, Mister.”
   “Sujata brought it,” answered Siddhartha.
   “So her name is Sujata,” thought Svasti. She looked a bit older than Svasti,
perhaps a year or two. Her large black eyes twinkled. Svasti stopped eating and
said, “I’ve seen you before on the village road, but I didn’t know your name was
Sujata.”
   “Yes, I am the daughter of the village chief of Uruvela. Your name is Svasti,
isn’t it? Teacher Siddhartha was just telling me about you,” she said, adding
gently, “Svasti, it is more correct to call a monk, ‘Teacher,’ than ‘Mister.’”
   Svasti nodded.
Siddhartha smiled. “Well then, I don’t need to introduce you two. Do you know,
children, why I eat in silence? These grains of rice and sesame are so precious, I
like to eat silently so that I can appreciate them fully. Sujata, have you ever had a
chance to taste brown rice? Even if you’ve already eaten, please taste a bit of
Svasti’s rice. It is quite delicious. Now then, we can eat together in silence, and
when we’ve finished, I’ll tell you a story.”
            Siddhartha, Svasti, and Sujata shared a meal in mindfulness.


   Siddhartha broke off a piece of brown rice and handed it to Sujata. She joined
her palms like a lotus and respectfully accepted it. The three of them ate quietly
in the deep calm of the forest.
   When the rice and sesame were gone, Sujata gathered the banana leaves. She
took a jug of fresh water from her side and poured some into the only cup she
had brought. She lifted the cup to offer water to Siddhartha. He took it in his two
hands and offered it to Svasti. Flustered, Svasti blurted, “Please, Mister, I mean,
Teacher, please, you take the first drink.”
   Siddhartha answered in a soft voice, “You drink first, child. I want you to have
the first drink.” Again he lifted and offered the cup to Svasti.


   Svasti felt confused but didn’t know how to refuse such an unaccustomed
honor. He joined his palms in thanks and took the cup. He drank all the water in
one long gulp. He handed the cup back to Siddhartha. Siddhartha asked Sujata to
pour a second cup. When it was full he raised it to his lips and sipped the water
slowly, with reverence and deep enjoyment. Sujata’s eyes did not stray from
Siddhartha and Svasti during this exchange. When Siddhartha finished drinking,
he asked Sujata to pour a third cup. This one he offered to her. She put down the
water jug, joined her palms, and accepted the cup of water. She lifted it to her
lips and drank in slow, small sips, just as Siddhartha had done. She was aware
that this was the first time she had ever drunk from the same cup as an
untouchable. But Siddhartha was her Teacher, and if he had done so, why
shouldn’t she? And she noticed that she had no feeling whatsoever of being
polluted. Spontaneously, she reached out and touched the buffalo boy’s hair. It
was such a surprise, Svasti didn’t have a moment to move out of the way. Then
Sujata finished drinking her water. She placed the empty cup on the ground and
smiled at her two companions.
   Siddhartha nodded. “You children have understood. People are not born with
caste. Everyone’s tears are salty, and everyone’s blood is red. It is wrong to
divide people into castes and create division and prejudice among them. This has
become very clear to me during my meditation.”
   Sujata looked thoughtful and she spoke, “We are your disciples and we
believe your teaching. But there does not seem to be anyone else like you in this
world. Everyone else believes that the sudras and the untouchables came forth
from the Creator’s feet. Even the scriptures say so. No one dares to think
differently.”
   “Yes, I know. But the truth is the truth whether anyone believes it or not.
Though a million people may believe a lie, it is still a lie. You must have great
courage to live according to the truth. Let me tell you a story about when I was a
boy.
   “One day, when I was nine years old and strolling alone in the garden, a swan
suddenly dropped from the sky and writhed on the ground in front of me in great
pain. I ran to pick it up, and I discovered that an arrow had deeply penetrated one
of its wings. I clasped my hand firmly around the arrow’s shaft and yanked it
out, and the bird cried as blood oozed from its wound. I applied pressure to the
wound with my finger to stop the bleeding, and took the bird inside the palace to
find princess Sundari, the lady in waiting. She agreed to pick a handful of
medicinal leaves and make a poultice for the bird’s wound. The swan shivered,


so I took off my jacket and wrapped it around her. Then I placed her close to the
royal fireplace.”
    Siddhartha paused for a moment to look at Svasti. “Svasti, I did not tell you
yet, but when I was young I was a prince, the son of King Suddhodana in the
city of Kapilavatthu. Sujata knows this already. I was about to go find some rice
for the swan when my eight-year-old cousin, Devadatta, burst into the room. He
was clutching his bow and arrows, and he asked excitedly, ‘Siddhartha, did you
see a white swan fall down near here?’
    “Before I could answer, Devadatta saw the swan resting by the fireplace. He
ran towards it, but I stopped him.
    “‘You may not take the bird.’
    “My cousin protested, ‘That bird is mine. I shot it myself.’
    “I stood between Devadatta and the swan, determined not to let him have it. I
told him, ‘This bird is wounded. I’m protecting it. It needs to stay here.’
    “Devadatta was quite stubborn and not about to give in. He argued, ‘Now
listen, cousin, when this bird was flying in the sky, it didn’t belong to anyone. As
I’m the one who shot it out of the sky, it rightfully belongs to me.’
    “His argument sounded logical, but his words made me angry. I knew there
was something wrong with his reasoning, but I couldn’t quite put my finger on
it. So I just stood there, speechless, becoming more upset. I felt like punching
him. Why I didn’t, I don’t know. Then, I saw a way to answer him.
    “‘Listen, cousin,’ I told him, ‘Those who love each other live together, and
those who are enemies live apart. You tried to kill the swan, so you and she are
enemies. The bird cannot live with you. I saved her, bandaged her wound,
warmed her, and was on my way to find food for her when you arrived. The bird
and I love each other, and we can live together. The bird needs me, not you.’”
    Sujata clapped her hands together, “That’s right! You were right!”
    Siddhartha looked at Svasti. “And what do you think, child, of my statement?”
    Svasti thought for a moment and then answered slowly, “I think you were
right. But not many people would agree. Most people would side with
Devadatta.”
    Siddhartha nodded. “You are right. Most people do follow Devadatta’s view.
    “Let me tell you what happened next. As we couldn’t agree on our own, we
decided to take our concern to the adults. That day there was a meeting of the
government in the palace, so we scurried to the hall of justice, where they were
meeting. I held the swan and Devadatta clasped his bow and arrows. We
presented our problem to the ministers and asked them to render judgment. The


affairs of state came to a halt as the men listened, first to Devadatta and then to
me. They discussed the matter at length, but they also were unable to agree. The
majority seemed to be leaning towards Devadatta, when my father, the king,
suddenly cleared his throat and coughed a few times. All the ministers suddenly
stopped speaking, and—tell me if you don’t think this is odd—with total accord,
they agreed that my argument was correct and that the bird should be given to
me. Devadatta was beside himself with anger, but of course, there was nothing
he could do.
   “I had the bird, but I wasn’t really happy. Even though I was still young, I
knew that my victory had been less than honorable. I was given the bird because
the ministers wanted to please my father, not because they saw the truth of what
I said.”
   “That’s sad,” Sujata said and frowned.
   “Yes, it was. But turning my thoughts to the bird, I took comfort in the fact
that she was safe. Otherwise she surely would have ended up in a cooking pot.
   “In this world, few people look with the eyes of compassion, and so we are
cruel and merciless toward each other. The weak are always oppressed by the
strong. I still see that my reasoning that day was correct, for it arose from love
and understanding. Love and understanding can ease the suffering of all beings.
The truth is the truth, whether or not it is accepted by the majority. Therefore, I
tell you children, it takes great courage to stand up for and protect what is right.”
   “What happened to the swan, Teacher?” asked Sujata.
   “For four days, I cared for her. When I saw that her wound had healed, I
released her, after warning her to fly far away lest she be shot again.”
   Siddhartha looked at the two children, their faces quiet and serious. “Sujata,
you must return home before your mother begins to worry. Svasti, isn’t it time
for you to return to your buffaloes and cut more grass? The armful of kusa grass
you gave me yesterday made a perfect cushion for meditation. Last night and
this morning, I sat upon it and my meditation was very peaceful. I saw many
things clearly. You have been a great help, Svasti. As my understanding deepens,
I shall share the fruit of my meditation with both you children. Now I will
continue sitting.”
   Svasti looked down at the grass which Siddhartha had shaped into a cushion.
Though the grasses were packed firm, Svasti knew they were still fragrant and
soft. He would bring his teacher a fresh armful of grass every three days to make
a new cushion. Svasti stood up and, with Sujata, joined his palms and bowed to
Siddhartha. Sujata set out for home and Svasti led his buffaloes to graze further


along the riverbank.

                                Chapter Five
                                 A Bowl of Milk
Every day Svasti went into the forest to visit Siddhartha. When he was able to
cut two bundles of grass by midday, he had lunch with Siddhartha. But as the dry
season continued and fresh grass became more and more scarce, it was often late
afternoon before he could visit his friend and teacher. Sometimes when Svasti
arrived, Siddhartha was sitting in meditation, and the boy sat silently for a brief
moment, and then left the forest, not wanting to disturb his teacher’s meditation.
But when he found Siddhartha walking slowly along the forest path, he joined
him, sometimes sharing simple conversation. Svasti also met Sujata frequently in
the forest. Every day, she brought Siddhartha a rice ball with one condiment,
such as sesame salt, peanuts, or a bit of curry. She also brought him milk or rice
porridge or rock candy. The children had many occasions to talk with each other
at the edge of the forest while the buffalo grazed. Sometimes Sujata brought her
friend Supriya, a young girl Svasti’s age. Svasti wanted to bring his brother and
sisters to meet Siddhartha. He was sure they could cross the river at its most
shallow point without difficulty.
   Sujata told Svasti how she first met Siddhartha several months earlier, and
how she had since brought him food every day around noon. It was on a full
moon day. At her mother’s request, she had put on a new pink sari and carried a
platter of food to offer to the forest gods. There were cakes, milk, congee, and
honey. The noon sun blazed. As Sujata neared the river, she saw a man lying
unconscious on the road. She put down her platter and ran to him. He was barely
breathing and his eyes were tightly closed. His cheeks had the sunken look of
someone who had not had food for a long time. From his long hair, tangled
beard, and ragged garment, Sujata knew he was a mountain ascetic who must
have fainted from hunger. Without hesitating, she poured a cup of milk and
eased it against the man’s lips, spilling a few drops on them. At first he did not
respond, but then his lips quivered and parted slightly. Sujata slowly poured milk
into his mouth. He began to drink and before long the cup was empty.
                    “Child, please pour me a little more milk.”


   Sujata then sat along the riverbank to see if the man would regain
consciousness. Slowly he sat up and opened his eyes. Seeing Sujata, he smiled.
He pulled the end of his garment back up over his shoulder and folded his legs in
a lotus position. He began to breathe, first shallowly and then more deeply. His
sitting was stable and beautiful. Thinking that he must be a mountain god, Sujata
joined her palms and began to prostrate herself before him, but the man
motioned for her to stop. Sujata sat up, and the man spoke to her in a soft voice,
“Child, please pour me a little more milk.”
   Happy to hear him speak, Sujata poured another cup and he drank it all. He
felt how truly nourishing it was. Less than an hour before, he thought he was
about to breathe his last. Now his eyes shone and he smiled gently. Sujata asked
him how he had fainted on the road.
   “I have been practicing meditation in the mountains. Harsh ascetic discipline


has left my body weak, so today I decided to walk down to the village to beg for
some food. But I lost all my strength getting here. Thanks to you, my life has
been saved.”
   They sat along the riverbank together and the man told Sujata about himself.
He was Siddhartha, the son of a king who reigned over the country of the Sakya
clan. Sujata listened carefully as Siddhartha told her, “I have seen that abusing
the body cannot help one to find peace or understanding. The body is not just an
instrument. It is the temple of the spirit, the raft by which we cross to the other
shore. I will no longer practice self-mortification. I will go into the village each
morning to beg for food.”
   Sujata joined her palms. “Honorable hermit, if you allow me, I will bring you
food each day. There is no need for you to interrupt your meditation practice. My
home is not far from here, and I know my parents would be happy for me to
bring you your meal.”
   Siddhartha was silent for a moment. Then he answered, “I am glad to accept
your offer. But from time to time, I would also like to go into the village to beg
in order to meet the villagers. I would like to meet your parents and other
children in the village as well.”
   Sujata was very happy. She joined her palms and bowed in gratitude. The
thought of Siddhartha visiting her home and meeting her parents was wonderful.
She knew, too, that bringing him food every day would be no hardship, as her
family was one of the wealthiest in the village. She did not mention this to
Siddhartha. She only understood that this monk was important and that offering
food to him was more beneficial than making a dozen offerings to the forest
gods. If Siddhartha’s meditation deepened, she felt, his love and understanding
could help relieve much suffering in the world.
   Siddhartha pointed out the Dangsiri mountain where he had lived in the caves.
“Beginning today, I will not return there. This forest is cool and refreshing.
There is a magnificent pippala tree which I shall make the place of my practice.
Tomorrow when you come with the food offering, please bring it there. Come, I
will show you the spot.”
   Siddhartha led Sujata across the river into the cool forest that bordered the
other bank of the Neranjara River. He showed her the pippala tree under which
he would meditate. Sujata admired its massive trunk and raised her head to gaze
at the leafy branches which spread out like an enormous canopy. It was a kind of
banyan tree with leaves shaped like hearts with long pointed tails. The leaves
were as big as Sujata’s hand. She listened to the birds chirping happily among


the branches. It was a truly peaceful and refreshing spot. In fact, she had been to
this tree before with her parents to make food offerings to the forest gods.
   “This is your new home, Teacher.” Sujata looked at Siddhartha with her round
black eyes. “I will visit you here every day.”
   Siddhartha nodded. He walked Sujata back out of the forest and said goodbye
to her at the riverbank. Then he returned alone to the pippala tree.
   From that day on, Sujata brought rice or chappatis to offer to the monk, just
before the sun began to cast shadows. Sometimes she also brought milk or
congee. Once in a while, Siddhartha would carry his begging bowl into the
village. He met Sujata’s father, the village chief, and her mother, who was
wearing a beautiful yellow sari. Sujata introduced him to other children in the
village and took him to the barber so he could have his head and beard shaved.
Siddhartha’s health recovered rapidly, and he told Sujata that his meditation
practice was beginning to bear fruit. Then came the day that Sujata met Svasti.
   That day Sujata had come early. She listened as Siddhartha told her about
meeting Svasti the day before. She had just said that she wished to meet Svasti
herself when he appeared. Afterward, whenever she met Svasti, she never forgot
to ask about his family. She and her servant, Purna, even went to visit Svasti’s
hut. Purna was hired to work in Sujata’s household when her predecessor,
Radha, died of typhoid fever. On these visits, Sujata brought used clothes still
full of good wear for Svasti’s family to use. And much to Purna’s surprise,
Sujata lifted baby Bhima in her arms. Afterwards, she cautioned Purna not to tell
her parents that she had held an untouchable child.
   One day, a number of children decided to go and visit Siddhartha together. All
of Svasti’s family came. Sujata brought her girlfriends Balagupta, Vijayasena,
Ulluvillike, and Jatilika. She also invited her sixteen-year-old cousin Nandabala,
who brought her younger brothers Nalaka, who was fourteen, and Subash, who
was nine. Eleven children sat in a semi-circle around Siddhartha, and they ate
lunch together in silence. Svasti had instructed Bala and Rupak beforehand how
to eat with quiet dignity. Even baby Bhima, sitting on Svasti’s lap, ate without
making a sound, her eyes open wide.
   Svasti brought a new armful of fresh grass for Siddhartha. He had asked his
friend Gavampati, also a buffalo boy, to watch over Mr. Rambhul’s buffaloes so
that he could have lunch with Siddhartha. In the fields, the sun blazed, but within
the forest, Siddhartha and the children were refreshed by the cool shade of the
pippala tree. Its leafy branches extended over an area wider than a dozen houses.
The children shared their food with one another, and Rupak and Bala especially


enjoyed chappati with curry and fragrant white rice dipped in peanuts and
sesame salt. Sujata and Balagupta brought enough water for everyone to drink.
Svasti’s heart overflowed with happiness. The atmosphere was still and quiet,
yet alive with the greatest joy. On that day, at Sujata’s request, Siddhartha told
them the story of his life. The children listened enraptured from beginning to
end.


                                  Chapter Six
                          Beneath a Rose-Apple Tree
When he was nine years old, Siddhartha was told about the dream his mother
had before giving birth to him. A magnificent white elephant with six tusks
descended from the heavens surrounded by a chorus of beatific praises. The
elephant approached her, its skin white as mountain snow. It held a brilliant pink
lotus flower in its trunk, and placed the flower within the queen’s body. Then the
elephant, too, entered her effortlessly, and all at once she was filled with deep
ease and joy. She had the feeling she would never again know any suffering,
worry, or pain, and she awoke uplifted by a sensation of pure bliss. When she got
up from her bed, the ethereal music from the dream still echoed in her ears. She
told her husband, the king, of the dream, and he, too, marvelled at it. That
morning, the king summoned all the holy men in the capital to come and divine
the meaning of the queen’s dream.
   After listening intently to the dream’s content, they responded, “Your majesty,
the queen will give birth to a son who will be a great leader. He is destined to
become either a mighty emperor who rules throughout the four directions, or a
great Teacher who will show the Way of Truth to all beings in Heaven and Earth.
Our land, your majesty, has long awaited the appearance of such a Great One.”
   King Suddhodana beamed. After consulting the queen, he ordered that
provisions from the royal storehouses be distributed to the ill and unfortunate
throughout the land. Thus the citizens of the kingdom of Sakya shared the king
and queen’s joy over the news of their future son.
   Siddhartha’s mother was named Mahamaya. A woman of great virtue, her
love extended to all beings—people, animals, and plants. It was the custom in
those days for a woman to return to her parents’ home to give birth there.
Mahamaya was from the country of Koliya, so she set out for Ramagama, the
capital of Koliya. Along the way, she stopped to rest in the garden of Lumbini.
The forest there was filled with flowers and singing birds. Peacocks fanned their
splendid tails in the morning light. Admiring an ashok tree in full bloom, the
queen walked towards it, when suddenly, feeling unsteady, she grabbed a branch
of the ashok tree to support her. Just a moment later, still holding the branch,


Queen Mahamaya gave birth to a radiant son.
   The prince was bathed in fresh water and wrapped in yellow silk by
Mahamaya’s attendants. As there was no longer any need to return to
Ramagama, the queen and the newborn prince were carried home in their four-
horse carriage. When they arrived home, the prince was again bathed in warm
water and placed next to his mother.
   Hearing the news, King Suddhodana hurried in to see his wife and son. His
joy was boundless. His eyes sparkled and he named the prince “Siddhartha,”
“the one who accomplishes his aim.” Everyone in the palace rejoiced, and one
by one they came to offer their congratulations to the queen. King Suddhodana
wasted no time in summoning the soothsayers to tell him of Siddhartha’s future.
After examining the baby’s features, they all agreed that the boy bore the marks
of a great leader and would no doubt rule over a mighty kingdom that spread in
all four directions.
   One week later a holy man named Asita Kaladevela paid a visit to the palace.
His back was bent with age, and he needed a cane to descend the mountain
where he lived. When the palace guards announced Master Asita’s arrival, King
Suddhodana personally came out to greet him. He ushered him in to see the baby
prince. The holy man gazed at the prince for a long time without uttering a word.
Then he began to weep, his trembling body supported by his cane. Streams of
tears fell from his eyes.
King Suddhodhana’s joy was boundless, as he hurried in to see his wife and
newborn son.


   King Suddhodana grew alarmed and asked, “What is it? Do you forebode
some misfortune for the child?”
   Master Asita wiped the tears with his hands and shook his head. “Your
majesty, I see no misfortune at all. I weep for myself, for I can clearly see that
this child possesses true greatness. He will penetrate all the mysteries of the
universe. Your majesty, your son will not be a politician. He will be a great
Master of the Way. Heaven and Earth will be his home and all beings his
relations. I weep because I will pass away before I have a chance to hear his
voice proclaim the truths he will realize. Majesty, you and your country possess
great merit to have given birth to such a one as this boy.”


   Asita turned to leave. The king pleaded for him to stay, but it was of no use.
The old man began walking back to his mountain. Master Asita’s visit sent the
king into a frenzy. He did not want his son to become a monk. He wanted him to
assume his throne and extend the borders of their kingdom. The king thought,
“Asita is only one among hundreds, even thousands of holy men. Perhaps his
prophecy is mistaken. Surely the other holy men who said Siddhartha would
become a great emperor were correct.” Clinging to this hope, the king was
comforted.
   After having attained sublime joy giving birth to Siddhartha, Queen
Mahamaya died eight days later, and all the kingdom mourned her. King
Suddhodana summoned her sister Mahapajapati, and asked her to become the
new queen. Mahapajapati, also known as Gotami, agreed, and she cared for
Siddhartha as if he were her own son. As the boy grew older and asked about his
real mother, he understood how much Gotami had loved her sister and how she
more than anyone else in the world could love him as much as his own mother.
Under Gotami’s care, Siddhartha grew strong and healthy.
   One day, as Gotami watched Siddhartha play in the garden, she realized he
was old enough to learn the graces of wearing gold and precious gems. She
instructed her attendants to bring forth precious jewels to try on Siddhartha, but
to her surprise, none rendered Siddhartha more handsome than he already was.
As Siddhartha expressed discomfort at wearing such things, Gotami ordered the
jewels to be returned to their cases.
   When Siddhartha reached school age, he studied literature, writing, music, and
athletics with the other princes of the Sakya dynasty. Among his schoolmates
were his cousins Devadatta and Kimbila and the son of a palace dignitary, a boy
named Kaludayi. Naturally intelligent, Siddhartha mastered his lessons quickly.
His teacher Visvamitta found the young Devadatta a sharp student, but never in
his teaching career had he taught a student more impressive than Siddhartha.
   One day when he was nine years old, Siddhartha and his schoolmates were
allowed to attend the ritual first plowing of the fields. Gotami herself dressed
Siddhartha right down to the fine slippers on his feet. Attired in his royal best,
King Suddhodana presided over the ceremonies. High ranking holy men and
brahmans paraded in robes and head-dresses of every color imaginable. The
ceremony was held next to the finest fields in the kingdom, not far from the
palace itself. Flags and banners waved from every gate and along every roadside.
Colorful displays of food and drink were laid out on altars crowded along the
roads. Minstrels and musicians strolled among the throngs of people, adding


mirth and merriment to the bustling festivities. Holy men chanted with utmost
solemnity as Siddhartha’s father and all the dignitaries of the court stood facing
the unfolding ritual. Siddhartha stood towards the back with Devadatta and
Kaludayi at his sides. The boys were excited because they had been told that
when the rituals were over, everyone would enjoy a feast spread out on the
grassy meadow. Siddhartha did not often go on picnics, and he was delighted.
But the holy men’s chanting went on and on what seemed like forever, and the
young boys grew restless. Unable to endure any longer, they wandered off.
Kaludayi held onto Siddhartha’s sleeve, and off they went in the direction of the
music and dancing. The hot sun blazed and the performers’ costumes grew wet
with perspiration. Beads of sweat shone on the dancing girls’ foreheads. After
running about among the scenes of entertainment, Siddhartha, too, grew hot and
he left his friends to seek the shade of the rose-apple tree alongside the road.
Beneath the cool branches, Siddhartha felt pleasantly refreshed. At that moment,
Gotami appeared and, spotting her son, she said, “I’ve been looking all over for
you. Where have you been? You should return now for the conclusion of the
ceremony. It would please your father.”
   “Mother, the ceremony is too long. Why must the holy men chant so long?”
   “They are reciting the Vedas, my child. The scriptures have a profound
meaning, handed down by the Creator Himself to the brahmans countless
generations ago. You will study them soon.”
   “Why doesn’t Father recite the scriptures instead of having the brahmans do
it?”
   “Only those born into the brahmana caste are permitted to recite the
scriptures, my child. Even kings who wield great power must depend on the
services of the brahmans for priestly duties.”
   Siddhartha thought over Gotami’s words. After a long pause, he joined his
palms and entreated her, “Please, Mother, ask Father if I may stay here. I feel so
happy sitting beneath this rose-apple tree.”
   Giving in good-naturedly to her child, Gotami smiled and nodded. She stroked
his hair, and then returned down the path.
   At last the brahmans concluded their prayers. King Suddhodana stepped down
into the fields and, together with two military officers, began to plow the first
row of the season, as cheers resounded among the crowd. Then the farmers
followed the king’s example and began to plow their fields. Hearing the people’s
cheers, Siddhartha ran to the edge of the fields. He watched a water buffalo
straining to pull a heavy plow, followed by a robust farmer whose skin was


bronzed from long work in the sun. The farmer’s left hand steadied the plow
while his right hand wielded a whip to urge the buffalo on. Sun blazed and the
man’s sweat poured in streams from his body. The rich earth was divided into
two neat furrows. As the plow turned the earth, Siddhartha noticed that the
bodies of worms and other small creatures were being cut as well. As the worms
writhed upon the ground, they were spotted by birds who flew down and
grabbed them in their beaks. Then Siddhartha saw a large bird swoop down and
grasp a small bird in its talons.
   Utterly absorbed in these events, standing beneath the burning sun,
Siddhartha, too, became drenched in sweat. He ran back to the shade of the rose-
apple tree. He had just witnessed so many things strange and unknown to him.
He sat cross-legged and closed his eyes to reflect on all he had seen. Composed
and erect, he sat for a long time, oblivious to all the singing, dancing, and
picnicking taking place around him. Siddhartha continued to sit, absorbed by the
images of the field and the many creatures. When the king and queen passed by
sometime later, they discovered Siddhartha still sitting in deep concentration.
Gotami was moved to tears seeing how beautiful Siddhartha looked, like a small,
still statue. But King Suddhodana was seized with sudden apprehension. If
Siddhartha could sit so solemnly at such a young age, might not the holy man
Asita’s prophecy come true? Too disturbed to remain for the picnic, the king
returned alone to the palace in his royal carriage.
   Some poor, country children passed by the tree speaking and laughing happily.
Gotami motioned them to be quiet. She pointed to Siddhartha sitting beneath the
rose-apple tree. Curious, the children stared at him. Suddenly, Siddhartha opened
his eyes. Seeing the queen, he smiled.
   “Mother,” he said, “reciting the scriptures does nothing to help the worms and
the birds.”
   Siddhartha stood up and ran to Gotami and clasped her hand. He then noticed
the children observing him. They were about his own age, but their clothes were
tattered, their faces soiled, and their arms and legs piteously thin. Aware of his
princely attire, Siddhartha felt embarrassed, and yet he wanted very much to play
with them. He smiled and hesitantly waved, and one boy smiled back. That was
all the encouragement Siddhartha needed. He asked Gotami for permission to
invite the children to the picnic feast. At first she hesitated, but then she nodded
in assent.


                              Chapter Seven
                            White Elephant Prize
When Siddhartha was fourteen years old, Queen Gotami gave birth to a son,
Nanda. All the palace rejoiced, including Siddhartha, who was very happy to
have a younger brother. Every day after his studies, he ran home to visit Nanda.
Although Siddhartha was already of an age to be concerned with other matters,
he often took little Nanda on walks, accompanied by Devadatta.
   Siddhartha had three other cousins that he liked very much, named
Mahanama, Baddhiya, and Kimbila. He often invited them to play with him in
the flower gardens behind the palace. Queen Gotami enjoyed watching them
play as she sat on the wooden bench beside the lotus pond. Her attendant was
always ready to respond to her requests to bring drinks and snacks for the
children.
   With each passing year, Siddhartha grew ever more adept in his studies and
Devadatta had a hard time concealing his jealousy. Siddhartha mastered every
subject with ease, including the martial arts. Although Devadatta was stronger,
Siddhartha was more agile and alert. In math, the other boys yielded to
Siddhartha’s brilliance. Arjuna, his math teacher, spent hours answering
Siddhartha’s advanced questions.
   Siddhartha was especially gifted in music. His music teacher gave him a rare
and precious flute and on summer evenings Siddhartha would sit alone in the
garden and play his new instrument. Sometimes his songs were sweet and soft,
while other times the sound was so sublime that listeners felt as though they
were being carried high above the clouds. Gotami often sat outside as the
evening shadows fell in order to listen to her son’s music. She experienced deep
contentment as she allowed her heart to drift with the sound of Siddhartha’s
flute.
   As befitted his age, Siddhartha concentrated more intensely in his religious
and philosophical studies. He was instructed in all the Vedas, and he pondered
the meanings of the teachings and beliefs they expounded. He devoted special
study to the Rigveda and Atharveda scriptures. From the time he was very small,
Siddhartha had seen the brahmans recite scriptures and perform rituals. Now he


himself began to penetrate the subject matter contained in these sacred teachings.
Great importance was given to the sacred writings of Brahmanism. The words
and the sounds themselves were seen to hold great power which could influence
and even change the affairs of people and the natural world. The positions of the
stars and the unfolding of the seasons were intimately connected to prayers and
ritual offerings. The brahmans were the sole ones regarded capable of
understanding the hidden mysteries of heaven and earth, and they alone could
use prayer and ritual to bring proper order to the realms of humans and the
natural world.
   Siddhartha was taught that the cosmos emanated from a Supreme Being
known as Purusa or Brahman, and that all castes in society had issued from
various parts of the Creator’s body. Every person contained part of the essence
of the transcendental Creator and that universal essence comprised a person’s
basic nature or soul.
   Siddhartha devoted serious study, as well, to all the other brahmana texts,
including the Brahmanas and the Upanishads. His teachers wanted only to
instruct their charges in the traditional beliefs, but Siddhartha and his
companions insisted on asking questions that forced their teachers to address
contemporary ideas that did not always seem to accord with tradition.
   On the days the boys were off from school, Siddhartha persuaded them to visit
and discuss these matters with well-known priests and brahmans in the capital.
Thanks to these encounters, Siddhartha learned that there were a number of
movements in the country which openly challenged the absolute authority of the
brahmans. Members of these movements were not only discontented laymen
who wished to share some of the power that had long belonged exclusively to
the brahmana caste, but they included reform-minded members of the brahmana
caste as well.
   Since the day young Siddhartha had been given permission to invite a few
poor country children to his royal picnic, he had also been allowed to visit from
time to time the small villages that surrounded the capital. On these occasions,
he was always careful to wear only simple garments. By speaking directly with
the people, Siddhartha learned many things that he had never been exposed to in
the palace. He was aware, of course, that the people served and worshipped the
three deities of Brahmanism—Brahman, Vishnu, and Shiva. But he also learned
that they were manipulated and oppressed by the brahmana priests. In order to
have the proper rituals for births, marriages, and funerals, families were forced
to pay the brahmans in food, money, and physical labor, regardless of how


impoverished they were.
   One day while passing a straw hut, Siddhartha was startled by mournful cries
from within. He asked Devadatta to enter and inquire what was the matter. They
learned that the head of the household had recently died. The family was
wretchedly poor. The wife and children were piteously thin and dressed in
tattered rags. Their house was on the verge of collapse. Siddhartha learned that
the husband had desired the services of a brahman to purify the earth before
rebuilding their kitchen, but before providing these services, the brahman
demanded the man work for him. Throughout several days the brahman had
ordered him to haul large rocks and chop wood. During this time the man
became ill and the brahman permitted him to return home, but halfway home,
the man collapsed on the road and died.
   As a result of his own reflections, Siddhartha began to question some of the
fundamental teachings of Brahmanism: that the Vedas had been given
exclusively to the brahmana caste, that Brahman was the Supreme Ruler of the
universe, and that prayers and rituals of themselves possessed omnipotent power.
Siddhartha sympathized with those priests and brahmans who dared to directly
challenge these dogmas. His interest never waned, and Siddhartha never missed
a class or discussion on the Vedas. He also pursued the studies of language and
history.
   Siddhartha liked very much to meet and discuss with hermits and monks, but
as his father disapproved, he had to find excuses to go on other excursions in the
hope of encountering such men. These monks cared nothing for material
possessions and social status, unlike the brahmans who openly vied for power.
Rather, these monks abandoned everything in order to seek liberation and to cut
the ties that bound them to the sorrows and worries of the world. They were men
who had studied and penetrated the meaning of the Vedas and the Upanishads.
Siddhartha knew that many such hermits lived in Kosala, the neighboring
kingdom to the west, and in Magadha which lay to the south. Siddhartha hoped
that one day he would have a chance to visit these regions and study seriously
with men such as these.
   Of course, King Suddhodana was aware of Siddhartha’s aspirations. He
dreaded that his son might one day leave the palace and become a monk, and he
confided his worries to his younger brother, Dronodanaraja, the father of
Devadatta and Ananda.
   “The country of Kosala has long had its eye on our territory. We must count
on the talents of our young people, such as Siddhartha and Devadatta, to protect


the destiny of our country. I greatly fear Siddhartha may decide to become a
monk, as the Master Asita Kaladevela predicted. If this comes to pass, it is likely
that Devadatta will follow in Siddhartha’s footsteps. Do you know how much
they like to go out and meet with these hermits?”
   Dronodanaraja was taken aback by the king’s words. After pondering a
moment, he whispered in the king’s ear, “If you ask me, I think you should find a
wife for Siddhartha. Once he has a family to occupy him, he will abandon this
desire to become a monk.” King Suddhodana nodded.
   That night he confided his concerns to Gotami, who promised she would
arrange for Siddhartha to marry in the near future. Even though she had just
recently given birth to a girl, a princess named Sundari Nanda, soon after, she
began to organize a number of gatherings for the young people in the kingdom.
Siddhartha joined these evenings of music, athletic events, and field trips with
enthusiasm. He made many new friends, both young men and young women.
   King Suddhodana had a younger sister named Pamita whose husband was
King Dandapani of Koliya. The couple kept residences in both Ramagama, the
capital of Koliya, and in Kapilavatthu. Sakya and Koliya were separated only by
the Rohini River and their peoples had been close for many generations. Their
capitals were but a day’s journey apart. At Gotami’s request, the king and queen
of Koliya agreed to organize a martial arts competition on the large field that
bordered Kunau Lake. King Suddhodana personally presided over the event to
encourage the young people of his kingdom to develop their strength and
increase their fighting skills. All the young people of the capital were invited to
attend, girls as well as boys. The young women did not engage in the athletic
contests but encouraged the young men with their praise and applause.
Yasodhara, the daughter of Queen Pamita and King Dandapani, was responsible
for welcoming all the guests. She was a lovely and charming young woman, her
beauty natural and fresh.
   Siddhartha placed number one in all the events, including archery,
swordsmanship, horse racing, and weightlifting, and it was Yasodhara who
presented him with his prize, a white elephant. With her palms joined and her
head slightly bowed, in a voice noble and serene, she declared, “Please accept
this elephant, Prince Siddhartha, for your well deserved victory. And please
accept my heartfelt congratulations.”
Siddhartha placed number one in all the events. Yasodhara presented him with
his prize, a white elephant.


   The princess’ movements were graceful and unaffected, and her manner of
dress elegant and refined. Her smile was as fresh as a half-opened lotus.
Siddhartha bowed and looked into her eyes, saying in a quiet voice, “Thank you,
princess.”
   Devadatta stood behind Siddhartha, unhappy to have won only second place.
Upset that Yasodhara had not even noticed him, he grabbed the elephant’s trunk
and viciously struck it in a sensitive spot. Overcome with pain, the elephant
dropped to its knees.
   Siddhartha looked severely at Devadatta, “Cousin, that was outrageous.”
   Siddhartha rubbed the tender place on the elephant’s trunk and spoke
soothingly to it. Gradually the elephant stood up again and bowed its head in
respect to the prince. The spectators applauded loudly. Siddhartha climbed upon
the elephant’s back and the victory procession began. Under the guidance of its
trainer, the white elephant carried Siddhartha around the capital of Kapilavatthu,


and the people cheered. Yasodhara walked beside them with slow, graceful steps.

                                Chapter Eight
                            The Jewelled Necklace
As he grew into his teens, Siddhartha came to find palace life stifling, so he
began making excursions beyond the city limits to see what life was like outside.
He was always accompanied by Channa, his faithful attendant, and sometimes
also by his friends or brothers. Channa was responsible for Siddhartha’s horse
carriage, and he and Siddhartha took turns holding the reins. As Siddhartha
never used a whip, Channa did not either.
   Siddhartha visited every corner of the Sakya kingdom, from the rugged
foothills of the Himalayan mountains in the north to the great southern plains.
The capital, Kapilavatthu, was located in the richest, most populated region of
the lowlands. Compared with the neighboring kingdoms of Kosala and
Magadha, Sakya was quite small, but what it lacked in area it more than made up
in its ideal location. The Rohini and Banganga Rivers which began in the
highlands, flowed down to irrigate its rich plains. They continued southwards
and joined the Hiranyavati River before emptying into the Ganga. Siddhartha
loved to sit on the banks of the Banganga and watch the water rush by.
   The local villagers believed that the waters of the Banganga could wash away
one’s bad karma, from both present and past lives, and so they often submerged
themselves in the water, even at near freezing temperatures. One day, while
sitting along the riverbank with his attendant, Siddhartha asked, “Channa, do you
believe this river can wash away bad karma?”
   “It must, your highness, otherwise why would so many people come here to
wash themselves?”
   Siddhartha smiled. “Well then, the shrimp, fish, and oysters who spend their
entire lives in these waters must be the purest and most virtuous beings of all!”
   Channa replied, “Well, at least I can say that bathing in this river will wash
away the dirt and dust from one’s body!”
   Siddhartha laughed and patted Channa on the shoulder. “With that, I certainly
agree.”
   On another day, as he was returning to the palace, Siddhartha was surprised to
see Yasodhara in a small, poor village, with one of her maid servants, tending to


the village children who were suffering from eye diseases, influenza, skin
disorders, and other ailments. Yasodhara was dressed simply, yet she appeared to
be as a goddess who had appeared among the poor. Siddhartha was deeply
moved to see the daughter of a royal family placing her own comfort aside so
that she could care for the destitute. She rinsed their infected eyes and skin,
dispensed medicine, and washed their soiled clothes.
   “Princess, how long have you been doing this?” asked Siddhartha. “It is
beautiful to see you here.”
   Yasodhara looked up from washing a little girl’s arm. “For almost two years,
your highness. But this is only the second time I have been in this village.”
   “I often stop here. The children know me well. Your work must give you a
great feeling of satisfaction, princess.”
   Yasodhara smiled without answering. She bent over to continue washing the
girl’s arm. That day, Siddhartha had a chance to speak with Yasodhara for a
longer time. He was surprised to learn that she shared many of his own ideas.
Yasodhara was not content to remain in her lady’s quarters blindly obeying
tradition. She, too, had studied the Vedas and secretly opposed society’s
injustices. And like Siddhartha, she did not feel truly happy being a privileged
member of a wealthy, royal family. She loathed the power struggles among the
courtiers and even among the brahmans. She knew that as a woman she could
not effect great social change, so she found ways to express her convictions
through charitable work. She hoped that her friends might see the value of this
through her example.
Siddhartha was deeply moved to see Yasodhara caring for the destitute child.


   Since the day he first saw her, Siddhartha had felt a special affinity for
Yasodhara. Now he found himself drawn to every word she spoke. His father
had expressed a desire that he marry soon. Perhaps Yasodhara was the right
woman. During the musical and athletic gatherings, Siddhartha had met many
charming young women, but Yasodhara was not only the most beautiful, she was
the one with whom he felt ease and contentment.
   One day, Queen Gotami decided to organize a reception for all the young
women of the capital. She asked Pamita, Yasodhara’s mother, to help with the
preparations. The young women of Kapilavatthu were invited, and each was to
be presented with fine jewelry. Queen Pamita suggested that Siddhartha himself


present each gift, much in the same spirit that Yasodhara had welcomed the
guests that attended the martial arts contest. King Suddhodana and the members
of the royal family would be present.
   The party took place on a delightfully cool evening. Food and drinks were set
out throughout the palace halls, while musicians entertained the guests. Beneath
the bright, flickering lights of flowered lanterns, graceful young women arrived,
wearing colorful saris shimmering with gold thread. One by one they passed
before the royal dignitaries, including the king and queen. Siddhartha, dressed in
princely garb, stood to the left behind a table covered with pearl necklaces and
gold and precious gems to present to nearly a thousand young ladies.
   At first Siddhartha had refused to present the gifts personally, but Gotami and
Pamita had beseeched him. “It would be a great honor and happiness for any
person to receive a gift directly from you. You should understand that,” said
Pamita with a convincing smile. Siddhartha did not want to refuse to provide
happiness to others, and so he complied. But now, standing before the thousands
of guests, Siddhartha did not know how he could possibly choose a fitting gift
for each lady. Every young woman passed in full view of all the guests before
approaching Siddhartha. The first young woman to be presented was Soma,
daughter of a prince. As instructed by Pamita, she mounted the stairs of the royal
dais, stopped to bow to the king and queen and all the distinguished guests, and
then walked slowly towards Siddhartha. When she reached him, she bowed her
head, and Siddhartha bowed in return. Then he offered her a strand of jade
beads. The guests applauded their approval, and Soma bowed. She spoke her
thanks so softly that Siddhartha could not understand her words.
   The next woman was Rohini, named after the river. Siddhartha did not try to
distinguish among the young women by selecting different jewels to match their
particular grace and beauty. He picked up whichever ornament was next on the
table and offered it to the next young woman. Thus the presentation of gifts
proceeded quickly even though there were so many young women. By ten at
night, most of the jewelry had been given away. Everyone believed a young
woman named Sela was the last in line. But just as Siddhartha thought he had
completed his task, another young woman appeared from the audience and
slowly made her way to the dais. It was Yasodhara. She was dressed in an ivory
colored sari as simple and light as a cool morning breeze. She bowed to the king
and queen. Ever graceful and natural, she approached Siddhartha, smiled, and
asked, “Does your highness have anything left for me?”
   Siddhartha looked at Yasodhara and then confusedly at the ornaments


remaining on the table. He appeared flustered—there was nothing on the table
worthy of Yasodhara’s beauty. Suddenly he smiled. He removed the necklace
around his own neck and held it out to Yasodhara. “This is my gift to you,
princess.”
   Yasodhara shook her head. “I came here to honor you. How can I take away
your own necklace?”
   Siddhartha answered, “My mother, Queen Gotami, often says that I look better
without jewelry. Please, princess, accept this gift.”
   He motioned her to step closer so that he could place the shining beads around
her neck. The guests burst into applause, and it seemed as if the cheers would
never end. They all rose to their feet to express their joyous approval.


                                 Chapter Nine
                           The Path of Compassion
Siddhartha and Yasodhara’s wedding took place the following autumn. It was an
occasion of great joy and celebration for the entire kingdom. The capital,
Kapilavatthu, was decked with flags, lanterns, and flowers, and there was music
everywhere. Wherever Siddhartha and Yasodhara went in their carriage, they
were greeted with resounding cheers. They also visited outlying hamlets and
villages, bringing gifts of food and clothing to many poor families.
   King Suddhodana supervised the building of three palaces for the young
couple, one for each season. The summer palace was built on a beautiful hillside
in the highlands, while the rainy season and winter palaces were in the capital
city. Each palace had lotus pools, some for pale blue lotuses, some for pink, and
some for white. The couple’s fine garments and slippers, and the fragrant
sandalwood they lit every day, were ordered specially from Varanasi, the capital
of the Kasi kingdom to the southwest.
   King Suddhodana was at peace, now that Siddhartha had followed the path he
had wished his son to follow. He personally selected the finest musicians and
dancers in the kingdom to provide continual and pleasant entertainment for his
young son and daughter-in-law.
   But happiness for Siddhartha and Yasodhara was not to be found in a
pampered life of wealth and status. Their happiness came from opening their
hearts and sharing their deepest thoughts with each other. They weren’t moved
by exquisite and savory foods or fancy silken clothes. While they could
appreciate the artistry of the dancers and musicians, they were not carried away
by the pleasures they offered. They had their own dreams—to find answers
concerning the spiritual quest and the renewal of society.
Siddhartha and Yasodhara’s wedding was an occasion of great joy and
celebration for the entire kingdom.


   The following summer, as they were driven to their summer palace by faithful
Channa, Siddhartha’s boyhood attendant, Siddhartha introduced Yasodhara to
places throughout the kingdom she did not yet know. They stayed several days at
each location, sometimes spending the night in the homes of country folk,
sharing their simple foods and sleeping upon their woven string beds. They
learned a great deal about the way of life and the customs of each place they
visited.
   At times they encountered terrible misery. They met families with nine or ten
children, every child racked with disease. No matter how hard the parents toiled
day and night, they could not earn enough to support so many children. Hardship


went hand in hand with the life of the peasants. Siddhartha gazed at children
with arms and legs as thin as matchsticks and bellies swollen from worms and
malnutrition. He saw the handicapped and infirm forced to beg in the streets, and
these scenes robbed him of any happiness. He saw people caught in inescapable
conditions. In addition to poverty and disease, they were oppressed by the
brahmans, and there was no one to whom they could complain. The capital was
too distant and even if they went there, who would help them? He knew that
even a king had no power to change the situation.
   Siddhartha had long understood the inner workings of the royal court. Every
official was intent on protecting and fortifying his own power, not on alleviating
the suffering of those in need. He had seen the powerful plot against each other,
and he felt nothing but revulsion for politics. He knew that even his own father’s
authority was fragile and restricted—a king did not possess true freedom but was
imprisoned by his position. His father was aware of many officials’ greed and
corruption, but was forced to rely on these same individuals to maintain the
stability of his reign. Siddhartha realized that if he stood in his father’s place, he
would have to do the same. He understood that only when people overcame
greed and envy in their own hearts would conditions change. And so his desire
to seek a path of spiritual liberation was reignited.
   Yasodhara was bright and intuitive. She understood Siddhartha’s longings, and
she had faith that if Siddhartha resolved to find the path of liberation he would
succeed. But she was also quite practical. Such a search could last months, even
years. In the meantime, sufferings would continue to daily unfold around them.
And so she believed it was important to respond right in the present moment.
She discussed with Siddhartha ways to ease the suffering of the poorest members
of society. She had been doing work like that for several years, and her efforts
eased some of the people’s misery and brought some measure of peace and
happiness to her own heart as well. She believed that with Siddhartha’s loving
support she could continue such work for a long time.
   From Kapilavatthu came pouring all manner of goods and servants to provide
for the couple’s summer needs. Siddhartha and Yasodhara sent home most of the
servants, retaining only a few to assist them with the gardens, cooking, and
housekeeping. And, of course, they retained the services of Channa. Yasodhara
organized their daily life as simply as possible. She personally entered the
kitchen to direct the cooking of simple meals pleasing to Siddhartha, and she
cared for his garments with her own hands. She sought Siddhartha’s guidance
concerning the relief projects she intended to continue when they returned to the


capital. Siddhartha understood her need to engage in social action, and he never
failed to express his support. Because of this, Yasodhara placed even deeper trust
in her husband.
   But although Siddhartha understood the value of Yasodhara’s work, he felt
that her path alone could not bring true peace. People were entrapped not only
by illness and unjust social conditions, but by the sorrows and passions they
themselves created in their own hearts and minds. And if in time, Yasodhara fell
victim to fear, anger, bitterness, or disappointment, where would she find the
energy needed to continue her work? Siddhartha had himself experienced
suspicion, frustration, and pain when he saw how things worked in the palace
and in society. He knew that the attainment of inner peace would be the only
basis for true social work, but he did not confide these thoughts to Yasodhara,
because he feared that they would only cause her uncertainty and worry.
   When the couple returned to their winter palace, they entertained a constant
stream of guests. Yasodhara welcomed family members and friends with great
warmth and respect, but she was most attentive when Siddhartha spoke with
them about philosophy and religion and their relation to politics and society.
Even while going back and forth to direct the servants, Yasodhara never missed a
word of these conversations. She had hoped to discover among their friends
some who might like to join her work for the poor, but few expressed interest in
such pursuits. Most were more interested in feasting and having a good time. Yet
Siddhartha and Yasodhara patiently received them all.
   In addition to Siddhartha, there was one other person who understood and
wholeheartedly supported Yasodhara’s efforts—Gotami, the Queen
Mahapajapati. The queen was most attentive to her daughter-in-law’s happiness,
for she knew that if Yasodhara was happy, Siddhartha would be happy as well.
But that was not the sole reason she supported Yasodhara’s good work. Gotami
was a woman of compassion and from the first time she accompanied Yasodhara
on a visit to a poor village, she understood at once the true value of Yasodhara’s
work. It was not just the material goods given to the poor, such as rice, flour,
cloth, and medicine, but the kind glances, helping hands, and loving heart of one
willing to respond directly to those who suffer.
   Queen Mahapajapati was not like other women in the palace. She frequently
told Yasodhara that women possessed as much wisdom and strength as men and
needed to shoulder the responsibilities of society also. While women did possess
a special ability to create warmth and happiness in their families, there was no
reason for them to remain only in the kitchen or in the palace. Gotami found in


her daughter-in-law a woman with whom she could share true friendship, for like
herself, Yasodhara was thoughtful and independent. Not only did the queen offer
Yasodhara her approval, but she worked alongside Yasodhara as well.


                                 Chapter Ten
                                 Unborn Child
During this time, King Suddhodana expressed the desire to have Siddhartha
spend more time at his side so that he could instruct his son in political and
courtly affairs. The prince was invited to attend many official meetings,
sometimes alone with the king, at other times with the king’s court. Siddhartha
gave his full attention to these affairs, and he came to understand that the
political, economic, and military problems that beset any kingdom had their
roots in the selfish ambitions of those involved in politics. Concerned only with
protecting their own power, it was impossible for them to create enlightened
policies for the common good. When Siddhartha saw corrupt officials feign
virtue and morality, anger filled his heart. But he concealed it, as he did not have
any alternatives to offer.
   “Why don’t you contribute ideas at court instead of always sitting so
silently?” King Suddhodana asked one day after a long meeting with several
officials.
   Siddhartha looked at his father. “It is not that I haven’t ideas, but it would be
useless to state them. They only point to the disease. I do not yet see a cure for
the selfish ambitions of those in the court. Look at Vessamitta, for example. He
holds an impressive amount of power at court, yet you know he is corrupt. More
than once he has tried to encroach upon your authority, but you are still forced to
depend on his services. Why? Because you know if you don’t, chaos will break
loose.”
   King Suddhodana looked at his son silently for a long moment. Then he
spoke. “Siddhartha, you know well that in order to maintain peace in one’s
family and country, there are certain things one must tolerate. My own power is
limited, but I am sure that if you prepared yourself to be king, you would do far
better than I have. You possess the talent needed to purge the ranks of corruption
while preventing chaos in our homeland.”
   Siddhartha sighed. “Father, I do not think it is a question of talent. I believe
the fundamental problem is to liberate one’s own heart and mind. I too am
trapped by feelings of anger, jealousy, fear, and desire.”


   Similar exchanges between father and son made King Suddhodana grow
increasingly anxious. He recognized that Siddhartha was a person of unusual
depth, and he saw how differently he and his son viewed the world. Still, he
fostered the hope that over time, Siddhartha would come to accept his role and
fill it in a most worthy way.
   In addition to his duties at court and assisting Yasodhara, Siddhartha
continued to meet and study with well-known brahmans and monks. He knew
that the pursuit of religion was not just the study of the holy scriptures but
included the practice of meditation to attain liberation for one’s heart and mind,
and he sought to learn more about meditation. He applied all that he learned in
these studies to his own life in the palace, and he shared these insights with
Yasodhara.
   “Gopa,” Siddhartha liked to call Yasodhara affectionately, “perhaps you
should also practice meditation. It will bring peace to your heart and enable you
to continue your work for a long time.”
   Yasodhara followed his advice. No matter how busy her work kept her, she
reserved time for meditation. Husband and wife often sat together silently. At
such times, their attendants left them alone, and the couple asked their musicians
and dancers to go perform elsewhere.
                    Husband and wife often sat together silently.


   From the time he was small, Siddhartha had been taught the four stages of a
brahman’s life. In youth, a brahman studied the Vedas. In the second stage, he
married, raised a family, and served society. In the third stage, when his children
were grown, he could retire and devote himself to religious studies. And in the
fourth stage, released from every tie and obligation, a brahman could live the life
of a monk. Siddhartha thought about it and concluded that by the time one was
old, it would be too late to study the Way. He did not want to wait that long.
   “Why can’t a person live all four ways at once? Why can’t a man pursue a
religious life while he still has a family?”
   Siddhartha wanted to study and practice the Way in the very midst of his
present life. Of course, he could not refrain from thinking about famous teachers
in distant places such as Savatthi or Rajagaha. He was sure that if he could find a
way to study with such masters, he would make much more progress. The
monks and teachers he frequently met had all mentioned the names of certain


great masters such as Alara Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta. Everyone aspired to
study with such masters and each day, Siddhartha felt his own desire grow ever
more urgent.
   One afternoon Yasodhara came home, her face filled with grief. She did not
speak to anyone. A young child she had tended for more than a week had just
died. Despite all her efforts, she could not rescue the child from death’s grasp.
Overcome with sadness, she sat in meditation while tears streamed down her
cheeks. It was impossible to hold back feelings. When Siddhartha returned from
a meeting at court, she again burst into tears. Siddhartha held her in his arms and
tried to console her.
   “Gopa, tomorrow I will go with you to the funeral. Cry now, it will lessen the
pain in your heart. Birth, old age, sickness, and death are heavy burdens each of
us carries in this life. What has happened to the child could happen to any of us
at any moment.”
   Yasodhara spoke between sobs, “Each day, I see how true all the things you
have said are. My two hands are so small compared to the immensity of
suffering. My heart is constantly filled with anxiety and sorrow. O husband,
please show me how I can overcome the suffering in my heart.”
   Siddhartha embraced Yasodhara tightly in his arms. “My wife, I myself am
seeking a path to overcome the suffering and anxiety in my own heart. I have
seen into the situation of society and human beings, but despite all my efforts, I
have not yet seen the way to liberation. Yet I feel sure that one day I will find a
way for all of us. Gopa, please have faith in me.”
   “I have never been without faith in you, my darling. I know that once you
have resolved to accomplish something, you will pursue it until you succeed. I
know that one day you will leave all your wealth and privileges behind in order
to seek the Way. Only, please, my husband, do not leave me just now. I need
you.”
   Siddhartha raised Yasodhara’s chin and looked into her eyes, “No, no, I won’t
leave you now. Only when, when...”
   Yasodhara placed her hand over Siddhartha’s mouth. “Siddhartha, please say
no more. I want to ask you something—if you were to have a child with me,
would you want it to be a boy or a girl?”
   Siddhartha was startled. He looked carefully at Yasodhara. “What are you
saying, Gopa? Do you mean, can you be...”
   Yasodhara nodded. She pointed to her belly and said, “I am so happy to be
carrying the fruit of our love. I want it to be a boy who looks just like you, with


your intelligence and kind virtue.”
   Siddhartha put his arms around Yasodhara and held her close. In the midst of
his great joy, he felt the seeds of worry. Still, he smiled and said, “I will be just
as happy if it is a boy or a girl, just so long as the baby has your compassion and
wisdom. Gopa, have you told Mother?”
   “You are the only one I have told. This evening, I will go to the main palace
and tell Queen Gotami. At the same time, I will ask her advice on how best to
care for our unborn child. Tomorrow I will go tell my own mother, Queen
Pamita. I’m sure everyone will be very happy.”
   Siddhartha nodded. He knew that his mother would pass the news on to his
father as soon as she learned of it. The king would be overjoyed and would no
doubt organize a great banquet to celebrate. Siddhartha felt the ties that bound
him to life in the palace tightening.


                               Chapter Eleven
                                 Moonlight Flute
Udayin, Devadatta, Kimbila, Bhadya, Mahanama, Kaludayi, and Anuruddha
were Siddhartha’s friends who visited most often to discuss such things as
politics and ethics. In addition to Ananda and Nanda, they would be Siddhartha’s
closest advisors when he became king. They liked to begin their debates after
several glasses of wine. Giving in to his friend’s wishes, Siddhartha often kept
the royal musicians and dancers performing far into the night.
    Devadatta could wax endlessly about political matters, and Udayin and
Mahanama debated tirelessly every point Devadatta made. Siddhartha spoke
little. Sometimes in the middle of a dance or song, Siddhartha would look over
to find Anuruddha nodding, half-asleep, and obviously wearied by the evening’s
activities. He would nudge Anuruddha and the two would steal outside where
they could watch the moon and listen to the nearby stream. Anuruddha was
Mahanama’s younger brother. Their father was Prince Amritodana, Siddhartha’s
paternal uncle. Anuruddha was an affable, handsome fellow, much admired by
the court ladies, though he himself was not inclined to pursue romance.
Sometimes Siddhartha and Anuruddha would sit in the garden until midnight. By
then their friends had become too intoxicated or tired to discuss any more and
had retired to the guest rooms, and Siddhartha would take out his flute and play
beneath the bright moonlight. Gopa would place a small incense burner on a
rock, and sit quietly nearby, listening to the soft music rise and fall in the warm
night air.
Siddhartha played his flute for Anuruddha beneath the bright moonlight.


   Time flew, and the day for Yasodhara to give birth approached. Queen Pamita
told her daughter she did not need to return home to give birth, as Pamita herself
was then living in Kapilavatthu. With Queen Mahapajapati, Pamita selected the
finest midwives in the capital to assist Yasodhara. On the day Yasodhara went
into labor, both Queen Gotami and Queen Pamita were there. A solemn and
expectant atmosphere pervaded the palace. Although King Suddhodana did not
show his presence, Siddhartha knew that the king anxiously awaited news of the
birth in his own quarters.
   When Yasodhara’s labor pains began in earnest, she was led into the inner
chamber by her attendants. It was only the noon hour, but suddenly the sky grew


dark with clouds, as though a deity’s hand had obscured the sun. Siddhartha sat
outside. Although he was separated from his wife by two walls, he could clearly
hear her cries. With each passing moment, his anxiety increased. Yasodhara’s
moans now followed one upon another, and he was beside himself. Her cries tore
at his heart until it was impossible to sit still. He stood and paced the floor. At
times Yasodhara’s groans were so intense he could not quell his panic. His
mother, Queen Mahamaya, had died as a result of giving birth to him, and that
was a sorrow he could never forget. Now it was Yasodhara’s turn to give birth to
his own child. Childbirth was a passage most married woman experienced, a
passage fraught with danger, including the possibility of death. Sometimes both
mother and child died.
   Reminding himself what he had learned from a monk a number of months
earlier, Siddhartha sat down in a lotus position and began to take hold of his
mind and heart. This time of passage was a true test. He must maintain a calm
heart even in the midst of Yasodhara’s cries. Suddenly, the image of a newborn
child arose in his mind. It was the image of his own child. Everyone had hoped
he would have a child and would be happy for him once he did. He himself had
hoped for a child. But now in the intensity of the actual event, he understood
how immensely important the birth of a child is. He had not yet found his own
path, he did not yet know where he was going, and yet here he was having a
child—was it not a pity for the child?
   Yasodhara’s cries abruptly stopped. He stood up. What had happened? He
could feel his own heartbeat. He observed his breath again in order to regain his
calm. Just at that moment, the cries of an infant arose. The baby was born!
Siddhartha wiped the sweat from his forehead.
   Queen Gotami opened the door and looked in at him. She smiled and
Siddhartha knew that Yasodhara was safe. The queen sat down before him and
said, “Gopa has given birth to a boy.”
   Siddhartha smiled and looked at his mother with gratitude.
   “I will name the child Rahula.”
   That afternoon, Siddhartha entered the room to visit his wife and son.
Yasodhara gazed at him, her shining eyes filled with love. Their son lay by her
side, swaddled in silk, and Siddhartha could see only his plump little face.
Siddhartha looked at Yasodhara as if to ask something. Understanding, she
nodded her assent and gestured for Siddhartha to pick Rahula up. Siddhartha
lifted the infant in his arms as Yasodhara watched. Siddhartha felt as though he
were floating, and yet his heart was heavy with worry.


   Yasodhara rested for several days. Queen Gotami took care of everything from
preparing special foods to tending the fireplace to keep mother and child warm.
One day after they returned home, Siddhartha visited his wife and son, and as he
held Rahula in his arms, he marvelled at how precious and fragile a human life
was. He recalled the day he and Yasodhara had attended the funeral of the poor
child, four years old. The body still lay upon its deathbed when Siddhartha and
Yasodhara arrived. All signs of life had vanished, and the child’s skin was pale
and waxen, its body no more than skin and bones. The child’s mother knelt
beside the bed wiping her tears and then crying again. A moment later, a
brahman arrived to perform the funeral rites. Neighbors who had kept an all-
night vigil, lifted the child’s corpse onto a bamboo stretcher they had made to
carry the body to the river. Siddhartha and Yasodhara followed the procession of
poor villagers. A simple funeral pyre had been set up by the riverbank.
Following the brahman’s instructions, the people carried the stretcher down to
the river and submerged the body. They then lifted it back up and left it on the
ground for the water to drain away. This was a purification rite, for the people
believed that the waters of the Banganga River could cleanse bad karma. A man
poured perfume over the funeral pyre and then the child’s body was placed upon
it. The brahman held a lit torch and walked around the pyre while chanting.
Siddhartha recognized the passages from the Vedas. After the brahman had
circled the pyre three times, he lit it, and it soon burst into flames. The child’s
mother, brothers, and sisters wailed. Before long, the fire consumed the little
boy’s corpse. Siddhartha looked at Yasodhara and saw her eyes were filled with
tears. Siddhartha felt like crying, too. “Child, O Child, where now do you
return?” he thought.
   Siddhartha handed Rahula back to Yasodhara. He went outside and sat alone
in the garden until the evening shadows fell. A servant came looking for him.
“Your highness, the queen asked me to find you. Your royal father has come to
visit.”
   Siddhartha went back inside. The palace torches had all been lit and flickered
brightly.


                               Chapter Twelve
                                    Kanthaka
Yasodhara quickly regained her strength and soon was able to return to her
work, while also spending much time with baby Rahula. One spring day, at
Queen Gotami’s insistence, Channa drove Siddhartha and Yasodhara out into the
countryside for an outing. They brought Rahula along and a young servant girl
named Ratna to help care for him.
   Pleasant sunlight streamed down upon tender green leaves. Birds sang on the
blossoming branches of ashok and rose-apple trees. Channa let the horses trot at
a leisurely pace. Country folk, recognizing Siddhartha and Yasodhara, stood and
waved in greeting. When they approached the banks of the Banganga River,
Channa pulled on the reins and brought the carriage to a sudden halt. Blocking
the road before them was a man who had collapsed. His arms and legs were
pulled in towards his chest and his whole body shook. Moans escaped from his
half-open mouth. Siddhartha jumped down, followed by Channa. The man lying
in the road looked less than thirty years old. Siddhartha picked up his hand and
said to Channa, “It looks as though he’s come down with a bad flu, don’t you
think? Let’s massage him and see if it helps.”
   Channa shook his head. “Your highness, these aren’t the symptoms of a bad
flu. I’m afraid he’s contracted something far worse—this is a disease for which
there is no known cure.”
   “Are you sure?” Siddhartha gazed at the man. “Couldn’t we take him to the
royal physician?”
   “Your highness, even the royal physician can’t cure this disease. I’ve heard
this disease is highly infectious. If we take him in our carriage, he might infect
your wife and son, and even yourself. Please, your highness, for your own safety,
let go of his hand.”
   But Siddhartha did not release the man’s hand—he looked at it and then at his
own. Siddhartha had always enjoyed good health, but now looking at the dying
man no older than himself, all he had taken for granted suddenly vanished. From
the riverbank came cries of mourning. He looked up to see a funeral taking
place. There was the funeral pyre. The sound of chanting intertwined with the


grief-stricken cries and the crackling of fire as the funeral pyre was lit.
   Looking again at the man, Siddhartha saw that he had stopped breathing. His
glassy eyes stared upwards. Siddhartha released his hand and quietly closed the
eyes. When Siddhartha stood up, Yasodhara was standing close behind him.
How long she had been there, he did not know.
   She spoke softly, “Please, my husband, go and wash your hands in the river.
Channa, you do the same. Then we will drive into the next village and notify the
authorities so they can take care of the body.”
   Afterwards, no one had the heart to continue their spring outing. Siddhartha
asked Channa to turn around, and on the way back no one spoke a word.
   That night, Yasodhara’s sleep was disturbed by three strange dreams. In the
first, she saw a white cow on whose head was a sparkling jewel, as bright as the
North Star. The cow strolled through Kapilavatthu headed for the city gates.
From the altar of Indra resounded a divine voice, “If you can’t keep this cow,
there will be no light left in all the capital.” Everyone in the city began chasing
after the cow yet no one was able to detain it. It walked out the city gates and
disappeared.
   In her second dream, Yasodhara watched four god-kings of the skies, atop
Mount Sumeru, projecting a light onto the city of Kapilavatthu. Suddenly the
flag mounted on Indra’s altar flapped violently and fell to the ground. Flowers of
every color dropped like rain from the skies and the sound of celestial singing
echoed everywhere throughout the capital. In her third dream, Yasodhara heard a
loud voice that shook the heavens. “The time has come! The time has come!” it
cried. Frightened, she looked over at Siddhartha’s chair to discover he was gone.
The jasmine flowers tucked in her hair fell to the floor and turned to dust. The
garments and ornaments which Siddhartha had left on his chair transformed into
a snake which slithered out the door. Yasodhara was filled with panic. All at
once, she heard the bellowing of the white cow from beyond the city gates, the
flapping of the flag upon Indra’s altar, and the voices of heaven shouting, “The
time has come! The time has come!”
   Yasodhara awoke. Her forehead was drenched with sweat. She turned to
Siddhartha and shook him. “Siddhartha, Siddhartha, please wake up.”
   He was already awake. He stroked her hair to comfort her and asked, “What
did you dream, Gopa? Tell me.”
   She recounted all three dreams and then asked him, “Are these dreams an
omen that you will soon leave me in order to go and seek the Way?”
   Siddhartha fell silent, then consoled her, “Gopa, please don’t worry. You are a


woman of depth. You are my partner, the one who can help me to truly fulfil my
quest. You understand me more than anyone else. If in the near future I must
leave and travel far from you, I know you possess the courage to continue your
work. You will care for and raise our child well. Though I am gone, though I am
far away from you, my love for you remains the same. I will never stop loving
you, Gopa. With that knowledge, you will be able to endure our separation. And
when I have found the Way, I will return to you and to our child. Please now, try
to get some rest.”
   Siddhartha’s words, spoken so tenderly, penetrated Yasodhara’s heart.
Comforted, she closed her eyes and slept.
   The following morning, Siddhartha went to speak to his father. “My royal
father, I ask your permission to leave home and become a monk in order to seek
the path of enlightenment.”
   King Suddhodana was greatly alarmed. Though he had long known this day
might arrive, he had certainly not expected it to take place so abruptly. After a
long moment, he looked at his son and answered, “In the history of our family, a
few have become monks, but no one has ever done it at your age. They all
waited until they were past fifty. Why can’t you wait? Your son is still small, and
the whole country is relying on you.”
   “Father, a day upon the throne would be like a day of sitting on a bed of hot
coals for me. If my heart has no peace, how can I fulfil your or the people’s trust
in me? I have seen how quickly time passes, and I know my youth is no
different. Please grant me your permission.”
   The king tried to dissuade his son. “You must think of your homeland, your
parents, Yasodhara, and your son who is still an infant.”
   “Father, it is precisely because I do think of all of you that I now ask your
permission to go. It is not that I wish to abandon my responsibilities. Father, you
know that you cannot free me from the suffering in my heart any more than you
can release the suffering in your own heart.”
   The king stood up and grabbed his son’s hand. “Siddhartha, you know how
much I need you. You are the one on whom I have placed all my hopes. Please,
don’t abandon me.”
   “I will never abandon you. I am only asking you to let me go away for a time.
When I have found the Way, I will return.”
   A look of pain crossed King Suddhodana’s face. He said no more and retired
to his quarters.
   Later on, Queen Gotami came to spend the day with Yasodhara, and in the


early evening, Udayin, one of Siddhartha’s friends, came to visit with Devadatta,
Ananda, Bhadya, Anuruddha, Kimbila, and Bhadrika. Udayin had organized a
party and had hired one of the finest dancing troupes in the capital to perform.
Festive torches brightened the palace.
   Gotami told Yasodhara that Udayin had been summoned by the king and
given the task to do everything he could think of to entice Siddhartha to remain
in the palace. The evening’s party was the first of Udayin’s plans.
   Yasodhara instructed her attendants to prepare food and drinks for all the
guests before retiring to her quarters with Gotami. Siddhartha himself went out
and welcomed his guests. It was the full moon day of the month of Uttarasalha.
As the music began, the moon appeared above a row of trees in the southeastern
sky.
   Gotami confided her thoughts to Yasodhara until it was late and then excused
herself to return to her own residence. Yasodhara walked with her to the veranda
where she saw the full moon now suspended high in the night sky. The party was
still in full swing. Sounds of music, talking, and laughter drifted from within.
Yasodhara led Gotami to the front gate and then went on her own to find
Channa. He was already asleep when she found him. Yasodhara awoke him and
whispered, “It is possible the prince will require your services tonight. Prepare
Kanthaka to ride. And saddle another horse for yourself.”
   “Your highness, where is the prince going?”
   “Please don’t ask. Just do as I have said because the prince may need to ride
tonight.”
   Channa nodded and entered the stable while Yasodhara returned inside the
palace. She readied clothes suitable for traveling and placed them on
Siddhartha’s chair. She took a light blanket to cover Rahula and then lay upon
the bed herself. As she lay there she listened to the sounds of music, talking, and
laughter. It was a long time before the sounds faded then disappeared. She knew
the guests had retired to their quarters. Yasodhara lay quietly as silence returned
to the palace. She waited a long time, but Siddhartha did not return to their room.
   He was sitting alone outside, gazing at the radiant moon and stars. A thousand
stars twinkled. He had made up his mind to leave the palace that very night. At
long last, he entered his chamber and changed into the traveling clothes awaiting
him there. He pulled back the curtain and gazed upon the bed. Gopa was lying
there, no doubt asleep. Rahula was by her side. Siddhartha wanted to enter and
speak words of parting to Yasodhara, but he hesitated. He had already said
everything that was essential. If he woke her now, it would only make their


parting more painful. He let the curtain drop and turned to leave. Again he
hesitated. Once more he lifted back the curtain to take a last look at his wife and
son. He looked at them deeply as though to imprint on his memory that familiar
and beloved scene. Then he released the curtain and walked out.
   As he passed the guest hall, Siddhartha saw the slumbering, dancing girls
sprawled across the carpets. Their hair was undone and dishevelled, their mouths
hanging open like dead fish. Their arms, so soft and supple during the dance,
now looked as stiff as boards. Their legs were tangled across each other’s bodies
like victims on a battlefield. Siddhartha felt as though he were crossing a
cemetery.
   He made his way to the stables and found Channa still awake.
   “Channa, please saddle and bring Kanthaka to me.”
   Channa nodded. He had prepared everything. Kanthaka was already bridled
and saddled. Channa asked, “May I accompany you, prince?”
   Siddhartha nodded and Channa entered the stable for his own horse. They led
the horses out of the palace grounds. Siddhartha stopped and stroked Kanthaka’s
mane. “Kanthaka,” he spoke, “this is a most important night. You must give me
your best for this journey.”
After preparing Kanthaka for a long journey, Channa asked Siddhartha, “May I
accompany you?”


   He mounted Kanthaka and Channa mounted his horse. They walked them to
avoid making any loud noise. The guards were fast asleep, and they passed
through the city gates easily. Once well beyond the city gates, Siddhartha turned
for a last look at the capital, now lying quietly beneath the moonlight. It was
there that Siddhartha had been born and raised, the city where he had
experienced so many joys and sorrows, so many anxieties and aspirations. In the
same city now slept everyone close to him—his father, Gotami, Yasodhara,
Rahula, and all the others. He whispered to himself, “If I do not find the Way, I
will not return to Kapilavatthu.”
   He turned his horse towards the south and Kanthaka broke into a full gallop.


                             Chapter Thirteen
                        Beginning Spiritual Practice
Even at a full gallop, they did not reach the border of Sakya until daybreak.
Before them flowed the Anoma River, which they followed downstream until
they found a shallow place to cross over with the horses. They rode for another
spell before coming to the edge of a forest. A deer flitted in and out among the
trees. Birds flew close by, undisturbed by the men’s presence. Siddhartha
dismounted. He smiled and stroked Kanthaka’s mane.
   “Kanthaka, you are wonderful. You have helped bring me here, and for that, I
thank you.”
   The horse lifted his head and looked lovingly at his master. Siddhartha pulled
out a sword tucked in his horse’s saddle and then grasping his own long locks of
hair in his left hand, cut them off with his right. Channa dismounted his own
horse. Siddhartha handed him the hair and sword. He then removed his jeweled
necklace.
   “Channa, take my necklace, sword, and hair and give them to my father.
Please tell him to have faith in me. I have not left home to selfishly avoid my
responsibilities. I go now on behalf of all of you and all beings. Please, console
the king and queen for me. Console Yasodhara. I ask this of you.”
   As Channa took the necklace, tears streamed from his eyes. “Your highness,
everyone will suffer terribly. I don’t know what I will say to the king and queen
or to your wife, Yasodhara. Your highness, how will you sleep beneath the trees
like an ascetic when all your life you’ve known nothing but a warm bed and soft
blankets?”
   Siddhartha smiled. “Don’t worry, Channa. I can live the way others do. You
must return to tell everyone of my decision before they begin to worry about my
disappearance. Leave me here alone now.”
   Channa wiped his tears. “Please, your highness, let me stay here to serve you.
Have mercy on me and don’t make me bear such sorrowful news to ones I love!”
   Siddhartha patted his attendant on the shoulder. His voice grew serious.
“Channa, I need you to return and inform my family. If you truly care for me,
please do as I say. I don’t need you here, Channa. No monk has need of a


personal attendant! Please, return home now!”
   Channa reluctantly obeyed the prince. He carefully placed the hair and
necklace inside his jacket and tucked the sword in Kanthaka’s saddle. He
grasped Siddhartha’s arm in his two hands and beseeched him, “I will do as you
say, but please, your highness, remember me, remember us all. Don’t forget to
return after you have found the Way.”
   Siddhartha nodded and smiled reassuringly at Channa. He stroked Kanthaka’s
head. “Kanthaka, my friend, now return home.”
   Channa held Kanthaka’s reins and mounted his own steed. Kanthaka turned to
look at Siddhartha one last time, his eyes filled with tears no less than Channa’s.
   Siddhartha waited until Channa and the two horses were out of sight before he
turned toward the forest to enter his new life. The sky would now serve as his
roof and the forest as his home. A sense of ease and contentment welled within
him. Just at that moment a man came walking out of the forest. At first glance,
Siddhartha thought he was a monk, for he was wearing the customary robe. But
on closer inspection, Siddhartha saw the man was carrying a bow, and a quiver
of arrows was slung across his back.
   “You are a hunter, are you not?” asked Siddhartha.
   “That is correct,” the man answered.
   “If you are a hunter, why are you dressed as a monk?”
   The hunter smiled and said, “Thanks to this robe the animals do not fear me
and I am thus easily able to shoot them.”
   Siddhartha shook his head. “Then you are abusing the compassion of those
who follow a spiritual path. Would you agree to trade your robe for my
garments?”
   The hunter looked at Siddhartha and saw he was wearing royal garments of
inestimable value.
   “Do you really want to trade?” the hunter asked. “Absolutely,” said
Siddhartha. “You could sell these garments and have enough money to stop
hunting and begin a new trade. As for me, I wish to be a monk and have need of
a robe like yours.”
   The hunter was overjoyed and after exchanging his robe for Siddhartha’s
handsome clothes, he hurried off. Siddhartha now had the appearance of a real
monk. He stepped into the forest and found a tree to sit beneath. For the first
time as a homeless monk, he sat in meditation. After a long final day in the
palace and an autumn night spent on the back of a horse, Siddhartha now
experienced a marvelous ease. He sat in meditation to savor and nurture the


feeling of release and freedom that had filled him the moment he entered the
forest.
   Sunlight filtered through the trees and came to rest on Siddhartha’s eyelashes.
He opened his eyes and saw standing before him, a monk. The monk’s face and
body were thin and worn by a life of austerities. Siddhartha stood up and joined
his palms together in greeting. He told the monk he had only just abandoned his
home and had not yet had the chance to be accepted by any teacher. He
expressed his intent to travel south to find the spiritual center of Master Alara
Kalama and there ask to be accepted as a disciple.
   The monk told Siddhartha that he himself had studied under Master Alara
Kalama and that at present the Master had started a center just north of the city
Vesali. More than four hundred disciples were gathered there for his teaching.
The monk knew how to get there and said he would be glad to take Siddhartha.
   Siddhartha followed him through the forest to a path which wound up a hill
and entered another forest. They walked until noon, when the monk showed
Siddhartha how to gather wild fruits and edible greens. The monk explained that
it was sometimes necessary to dig roots to eat when there were no edible fruits
or greens to be found. Siddhartha knew he would be living in the forests a long
time and so he asked the names of all the edible foods and carefully noted
everything the monk told him. He learned that the monk was an ascetic who
lived on nothing but wild fruits, greens, and roots. His name was Bhargava. He
told Siddhartha that Master Alara Kalama was not an ascetic and in addition to
wild foraging, his monks begged for food or accepted what was brought as
offerings to them from neighboring villages.
   Nine days later, they reached the forest center of Alara Kalama, near Anupiya.
They arrived as Master Alara was giving a talk to more than four hundred
disciples. He looked about seventy years old and, though he appeared thin and
frail, his eyes shone and his voice resounded like a copper drum. Siddhartha and
his companion stood outside the circle of disciples and quietly listened to the
Master’s teaching. When he finished speaking, his disciples scattered throughout
the forest to pursue their practice. Siddhartha approached him and after
introducing himself, respectfully said, “Venerable Teacher, I ask you to accept
me as one of your disciples. I wish to live and study under your guidance.”
   The master listened and looked intently at Siddhartha, and then expressed his
approval. “Siddhartha, I would be happy to accept you. You may stay here. If
you practice according to my teachings and methods, you will realize the
teachings in a short time.”


   Siddhartha prostrated himself to express his happiness.
   Master Alara lived in a straw hut made for him by several of his disciples.
Scattered here and there in the forest were the straw huts of his followers. That
night, Siddhartha found a level place to sleep, using a tree root for his pillow.
Because he was exhausted from the long journey, he slept soundly until morning.
When he awoke, the sun had already risen and the songs of birds filled the
forest. He sat up. The other monks had finished their morning meditation and
were preparing to go down into the city to beg for food. Siddhartha was given a
bowl and shown how to beg.
   Following the other monks, he held his bowl and entered the city of Vesali.
Holding a bowl to beg for the first time, Siddhartha was struck by how closely
linked the life of a monk was to that of the laity—the monks were dependent on
the lay community for food. He learned how to hold his bowl properly, how to
walk and stand, how to receive the food offerings, and how to recite prayers in
order to thank those who made the offerings. That day Siddhartha received some
rice with curry sauce.
   He returned with his new companions to the forest, and they all sat down to
eat. When he had finished, he went to Master Alara to receive spiritual
instruction. Alara was sitting in deep meditation when Siddhartha found him,
and so he sat down before the master, quietly trying to focus his own mind. After
a long time, Alara opened his eyes. Siddhartha prostrated himself and asked
Master Alara to teach him.
   Alara spoke to the new monk about faith and diligence and showed him how
to use his breathing to develop concentration. He explained, “My teaching is not
a mere theory. Knowledge is gained from direct experience and direct
attainment, not from mental arguments. In order to attain different states of
meditation, it is necessary to rid yourself of all thoughts of past and future. You
must focus on nothing but liberation.”
   Siddhartha asked about how to control the body and the sensations, and then
respectfully thanked his teacher and walked away slowly to find a place in the
forest where he could practice. He gathered branches and leaves and constructed
a small hut beneath a sal tree where his meditation practice could ripen. He
practiced diligently and, every five or six days, he returned to ask Alara’s advice
concerning whatever difficulties he was experiencing. In a short time, Siddhartha
made considerable progress.
   While sitting in meditation he was able to let go of thoughts and even of
clinging to his past and future, and he attained a state of wondrous serenity and


rapture, although he felt the seeds of thought and attachment still present in him.
Several weeks later, Siddhartha reached a higher state of meditation, and the
seeds of thought and attachment dissolved. Then he entered a state of
concentration in which both rapture and non-rapture ceased to exist. It felt to him
as though the five doors of sense perception had completely closed, and his heart
was as still as a lake on a windless day.
   When he presented the fruits of his practice to Master Alara, the teacher was
impressed. He told Siddhartha that he had made remarkable progress in a short
time, and he taught Siddhartha how to realize the meditative state called the
realm of limitless space, in which the mind becomes one with infinity, all
material and visual phenomena cease to arise, and space is seen as the limitless
source of all things.
   Siddhartha followed his teacher’s instructions and concentrated his efforts on
achieving that state, and in less than three days, he succeeded. But Siddhartha
still felt that even the ability to experience infinite space had not liberated him
from his deepest anxieties and sorrows. Dwelling in such a state of awareness,
he still felt hindrances, so he returned to Alara for assistance. The master told
him, “You must go one step further. The realm of limitless space is of the same
essence as your own mind. It is not an object of your consciousness, but your
very consciousness itself. Now you must experience the realm of limitless
consciousness.”
   Siddhartha returned to his spot in the forest, and in just two days, he realized
the realm of limitless consciousness. He saw that his own mind was present in
every phenomenon in the universe. But even with this attainment, he still felt
oppressed by his deepest afflictions and anxieties. So Siddhartha returned to
Master Alara and explained his difficulty. The master looked at him with eyes of
deep respect and said, “You are very close to the final goal. Return to your hut
and meditate on the illusory nature of all phenomena. Everything in the universe
is created by our own mind. Our mind is the source of all phenomena. Form,
sound, smell, taste, and tactile perception such as hot and cold, hard and soft—
these are all creations of our mind. They do not exist as we usually think they do.
Our consciousness is like an artist, painting every phenomenon into being. Once
you have attained the state of the realm of no materiality, you will have
succeeded. The realm of no materiality is the state in which we see that no
phenomenon exists outside of our own mind.”
   The young monk joined his palms to express his gratitude to his teacher, and
returned to his corner of the forest.


   While Siddhartha studied with Alara Kalama, he made the acquaintance of
many other monks. Everyone was attracted by Siddhartha’s kind and pleasant
manner. Often, before Siddhartha had a chance to seek food for himself, he
found food waiting for him by his hut. When he came out of meditation, he
would find a few bananas or a rice ball secretly left for him by another monk.
Many monks liked to befriend Siddhartha in order to learn from him, as they had
heard their own master praise Siddhartha’s progress.
   Master Alara had once asked about Siddhartha’s background and so learned of
Siddhartha’s life as a prince. But Siddhartha only smiled when other monks
asked him about his royal past. He answered modestly, “It’s nothing of
importance. It would be best if we spoke only about our experiences of
practicing the Way.”
   In less than a month, Siddhartha attained the state of the realm of no
materiality. Happy to have achieved this state of awareness, he spent the
following weeks trying to use it to dissolve the deepest obstructions in his mind
and heart. But although the realm of no materiality was a profound state of
meditation, it, too, was unable to help him. Finally, he returned to ask the advice
of Master Alara Kalama.
   Alara Kalama sat and listened intently to Siddhartha. His eyes shone.
Expressing deepest respect and praise, he said, “Monk Siddhartha, you are
profoundly gifted. You have attained the highest level I can teach. All I have
attained, you have attained as well. Let us join together to guide and lead this
community of monks.”
   Siddhartha was silent as he contemplated Alara’s invitation. While the realm
of no materiality was a precious fruit of meditation, it did not help resolve the
fundamental problem of birth and death, nor did it liberate one from all suffering
and anxiety. It did not lead to total liberation. Siddhartha’s goal was not to
become the leader of a community, but to find the path of true liberation.
   Siddhartha joined his palms and answered, “Venerable Teacher, the state of
the realm of no materiality is not the final goal I am seeking. Please accept my
gratitude for your support and care, but now I must ask your permission to leave
the community in order to seek the Way elsewhere. You have taught me with all
your heart these past months and I will be forever grateful to you.”
   Master Alara Kalama looked disappointed, but Siddhartha had made up his
mind. The next day, Siddhartha again took to the road.


                               Chapter Fourteen
                                Crossing the Ganga
Siddhartha crossed the Ganges River, known as Ganga, and entered deep into the
kingdom of Magadha, a region renowned for its accomplished spiritual teachers.
He was determined to find someone who could teach him how to overcome birth
and death. Most of the spiritual teachers lived in remote mountains or forests.
Tirelessly, Siddhartha inquired the whereabouts of these masters, and sought out
each of them, no matter how many mountains and valleys he had to cross. He
continued his search through rain and sun, from one month to the next.
   Siddhartha met ascetics who refused to wear any clothes, and others who
refused to accept any food offerings, living on only the fruits, greens, and roots
that grew wild in the forests. Exposing their bodies to the elements, these
ascetics believed that by enduring extreme austerities they would enter heaven
after they died.
   One day Siddhartha said to them, “Even if you are reborn in Heaven, the
suffering on Earth will remain unchanged. To seek the Way is to find a solution
to life’s sufferings, not to escape life. Granted, we cannot accomplish much if we
pamper our bodies like those who live for sensual pleasure, but abusing our
bodies is no more helpful.”
   Siddhartha continued his search—remaining in some spiritual centers for three
months and in others for six. His powers of meditation and concentration
increased, but he was still unable to find the true path of liberation from birth
and death. The months passed quickly, and soon it was more than three years
since Siddhartha had left home. Sometimes, as he sat in meditation in the forests,
images arose in Siddhartha’s mind of his father, Yasodhara, and Rahula, and of
his childhood and youth. Although it was difficult for him to avoid feeling
impatient and discouraged, his strong faith that he would find the Way allowed
him to continue his search.
   During one period, Siddhartha dwelled alone on the hillside of Pandava, not
far from the capital city of Rajagaha. One day he took his bowl and went down
the hillside to beg in the capital. His walk was slow and dignified, his
countenance serene and resolute. People on both sides of the street stopped to


gaze at this monk who walked as elegantly as a lion passing through a mountain
forest. The royal carriage of King Bimbisara of Magadha happened to pass by,
and the king ordered his driver to stop so that he could have a good look at
Siddhartha. He asked his attendant to offer the monk food and to follow him to
see where he lived.
   The next afternoon, King Bimbisara rode to Siddhartha’s dwelling. Leaving
his carriage at the foot of the hill, he mounted the path with one of his attendants.
When he saw Siddhartha sitting beneath a tree, he approached to greet him.
   Siddhartha stood up. He could tell by his visitor’s dress that he was the king of
Magadha. Siddhartha joined his palms together and then motioned for the king
to sit on a large rock nearby. Siddhartha sat on another rock and faced the king.
   King Bimbisara was noticeably impressed by the monk’s noble bearing and
elevated manner. He said, “I am the king of Magadha. I wish to invite you to
come to the capital with me. I would like you by my side so that I may benefit
from your teaching and virtue. With you at my side, I am sure the kingdom of
Magadha would enjoy peace and prosperity.”
King Bimbisara was noticeably impressed by the monk’s noble bearing and
elevated manner.


   Siddhartha smiled. “Great King, I am more used to living in the forest.”
   “This is too harsh a life. You have no bed, no attendant to assist you. If you
agree to come with me, I will give you your own palace. Please return with me
to teach.”
   “Great King, palace life is not well suited to me. I am endeavoring to find a
path of liberation to free myself and all beings from suffering. Palace life is not
compatible with the heart’s quest of this monk.”
   “You are still young, as I am. I have need of a friend with whom I can truly
share. From the moment I saw you, I felt a natural connection with you. Come
with me. If you accept, I will reserve half of my kingdom for you, and when you
are older, you can return to the life of a monk. It won’t be too late.”
   “I thank you for your generous heart and offer of patronage, but I truly have
but one desire, and that is to find the path which can liberate all beings from
suffering. Time passes quickly, Great King. If I don’t use the strength and energy


I now possess as a young man, old age will arrive too soon and I will feel deep
regret. Life is so uncertain—sickness or death can occur at any moment. The
flames of inner turmoil caused by greed, anger, hatred, passion, jealousy, and
pride continue to burn in my heart. Only when the Great Way is discovered, will
liberation be possible for all beings. If you truly feel affection for me, you will
allow me to continue the path I have long pursued.”
   King Bimbisara was even more impressed after hearing Siddhartha speak. He
said, “It gives me great joy to hear your words so filled with determination. Dear
monk, allow me to ask where you are from and what your family name is.”
   “Great King, I come from the kingdom of Sakya. My family name is Sakya.
King Suddhodana who presently rules in Kapilavatthu is my father, and my
mother was Queen Mahamaya. I was the prince, heir to the throne, but because I
wished to become a monk in order to seek the Way, I left my parents, wife, and
son, more than three years ago.”
   King Bimbisara was astonished. “Then you yourself are of royal blood! I am
most honored to meet you, noble monk! The royal families of Sakya and
Magadha have long been on very close terms. How foolish of me to try to
impress you with my position and wealth in order to persuade you to return with
me. Please forgive me! Let me ask only this—from time to time, come to my
palace and allow me to offer you food, and when you have found the Great Way,
return in compassion to teach me as your disciple. Will you promise that?”
   Siddhartha joined his palms and answered, “I promise that when I have
discovered the path, I will return to share it with your highness.”
   King Bimbisara bowed low before Siddhartha and returned down the hill with
his attendant.
   Later that day the monk Gautama abandoned his dwelling place to avoid the
interruptions he feared would result from the young king bringing frequent
offerings. Heading south, he looked for another place conducive to practice. He
learned of the spiritual center of Uddaka Ramaputta, a great teacher who was
said to have attained very deep levels of understanding. Three hundred monks
were in residence at his center, located not far from Rajagaha, and four hundred
other disciples practiced nearby. Siddhartha made his way there.


                                Chapter Fifteen
                                   Forest Ascetic
Master Uddaka was seventy-five years old. He was venerated by all as though he
were a living god. Uddaka required all new disciples to begin at the most
elementary levels of practice, so Siddhartha began again with the simplest
meditation techniques. But in just a few weeks, he demonstrated to his new
teacher that he had already attained to the realm of no materiality, and Master
Uddaka was impressed. He saw in this young man of noble bearing a potential
spiritual heir, and he taught Siddhartha with utmost care.
   “Monk Siddhartha Gautama, in the state of no materiality, emptiness is no
longer the same as empty space, nor is it what is usually called consciousness.
All that remains are perception and the object of perception. Thus, the path to
liberation is to transcend all perception.”
   Siddhartha respectfully asked, “Master, if one eliminates perception, what is
left? If there is no perception, how do we differ from a piece of wood or a rock?”
   “A piece of wood or a rock is not without perception. Inanimate objects are
themselves perception. You must arrive at a state of consciousness in which both
perception and non-perception are eliminated. This is the state of neither
perception nor non-perception. Young man, you must now attain that state.”
   Siddhartha left to return to his meditation. In just fifteen days, he realized the
samadhi called neither perception nor non-perception. Siddhartha saw that this
state allowed one to transcend all ordinary states of consciousness. But whenever
he came out of this meditative state, he saw that in spite of its extraordinariness,
it did not provide a solution to the problem of life and death. It was a most
peaceful state to dwell in, but it was not the key to unlock reality.
   When Siddhartha returned to Master Uddaka Ramaputta, the Master praised
him highly. He grasped Siddhartha’s hand and said, “Monk Gautama, you are the
best student I have ever had. You have made enormous progress in such a short
time. You have attained the highest level I have. I am old and not long for this
world. If you will remain here, we can guide this community together and when
I die, you can take my place as Master of the community.”
   Once again, Siddhartha politely declined. He knew that the state of neither


perception nor non-perception was not the key to liberation from birth and death,
and that he had to move on. He expressed his deepest gratitude to the Master and
to the community of monks, and took his leave. Everyone had come to love
Siddhartha, and all were sad to see him go.
   During his stay at Uddaka Ramaputta’s center, Siddhartha made friends with a
young monk named Kondanna. Kondanna was very fond of Siddhartha and
regarded him as a teacher as well as a good friend. No one else in the community
except Siddhartha had attained the state of no materiality, not to mention the
state of neither perception nor non-perception. Kondanna knew that the Master
considered Siddhartha worthy to be his spiritual heir. Just looking at Siddhartha
gave Kondanna faith in his own practice. He often approached Siddhartha to
learn from him, and a special bond grew between them. Kondanna regretted his
friend’s departure. He accompanied Siddhartha down the mountain and waited
until he was no longer in sight before returning back up the mountain.
   Siddhartha had accomplished so much with the masters reputed to be the two
best meditation teachers in the land, and yet the fundamental issue of liberation
from suffering was still burning inside him. He realized that he probably would
not be able to learn much more from any of the other teacher-sages throughout
the land, and so he knew that he had to seek the key to enlightenment on his
own.
   Walking slowly west, between rice fields and across a long stretch of muddy
lagoons and streams, Siddhartha reached the Neranjara River. He waded across it
and walked until he reached Dangsiri Mountain, half a day’s walk from Uruvela
village. The steep and rocky slopes ended in saw-toothed peaks and concealed
many caves. Boulders as large as the homes of poor villagers perched on the
mountainside. Siddhartha resolved to remain here until he discovered the Way to
Liberation. He found a cave in which he could sit in meditation for long hours,
and while sitting, he reviewed all the practices he had done for what was now
more than five years. He remembered how he had advised the ascetics not to
abuse their bodies, telling them that that would only add to the suffering of a
world already filled with suffering. But now as he considered their path more
carefully, he thought to himself, “You can’t make a fire with soft, wet wood. The
body is the same. If physical desires are not mastered, it is difficult for the heart
to attain enlightenment. I will practice self-mortification in order to attain
liberation.”
   Thus, the monk Gautama began a period of extreme asceticism. On dark
nights, he entered the deepest and most wild reaches of the forest, the mere


thought of which was enough to make a person’s hair stand on end, and there he
remained throughout the night. Even as fear and panic engulfed his mind and
body, he sat without stirring. When a deer approached with its rustling sounds,
his fear told him that these were demons coming to kill him, but he did not
budge. When a peacock broke a piece of dead twig, his fear told him it was a
python coming down from a tree, yet he still did not move, even as fear shot
through him like the sting of red ants.
   He tried to overcome all physical fears. He believed that once his body was no
longer enslaved by fear, his mind would break the chains of suffering.
Sometimes he sat with his teeth clenched while pressing his tongue against the
roof of his mouth, using his willpower to suppress all fear and horror. Even when
he broke into a cold sweat and his whole body became drenched, he did not
move. At other times, he held his breath for long stretches until a roar like
thunder or a blazing furnace pounded in his ears, and his head felt as though
someone had taken an axe and cleaved it in two. Sometimes he felt as though his
head was being squeezed by a steel band and his stomach slashed open like a
goat’s by a butcher. And at times, he felt as if his body was being roasted over an
open fire. Through these austere practices, he was able to consolidate his
courage and discipline, and his body was able to endure unspeakable pain, but
his heart was still without peace.
   The monk Gautama practiced austerities in this way for six months. For the
first three of these months, he was alone on the mountain, but during the fourth
month, he was discovered by five disciples of Master Uddaka Ramaputta, led by
his old friend Kondanna. Siddhartha was happy to see Kondanna again, and he
found out that just one month after Siddhartha left the meditation center,
Kondanna himself had attained the state of neither perception nor non-
perception. Seeing there was nothing more he could learn from Master Uddaka,
Kondanna persuaded four friends to join him in seeking Siddhartha. After
several weeks, they were lucky enough to find him, and they expressed their
desire to stay and practice with him. Siddhartha explained to them why he was
exploring the path of self-mortification, and the five young men, Kondanna,
Vappa, Bhaddiya, Assaji, and Mahanama, resolved to join him. Each monk
found a cave to live in, not far from one another, and every day one of them went
into town to beg for food. When he returned, the food was divided into six
portions so that none of them had more than a small handful each day.
   Days and months went by, and the six monks grew thin and gaunt. They left
the mountain and moved east toward the village of Uruvela, on the bank of the


Neranjara, and continued to practice in the same way. But Siddhartha’s
austerities began to alarm even his five companions, and they found it
impossible to keep up with him. Siddhartha ceased bathing in the river or even
taking his share of the food. On some days he ate just a shrivelled guava he
happened to find on the ground or a piece of dried buffalo manure. His body had
become terribly wasted—it was little more than loose flesh hanging on
protruding bones. He had not cut his hair or beard in six months, and when he
rubbed his head, handfuls of hair fell out as though there was no longer any
space for it to grow on the bit of flesh still clinging to his skull.
   And then one day, while practicing sitting meditation in a cemetery,
Siddhartha realized with a jolt how wrong the path of self-mortification was. The
sun had set and a cool breeze gently caressed his skin. After sitting all day
beneath the blazing sun, the breeze was delightfully refreshing, and Siddhartha
experienced an ease in his mind unlike anything he had felt during the day. He
realized that body and mind formed one reality which could not be separated.
The peace and comfort of the body were directly related to the peace and
comfort of the mind. To abuse the body was to abuse the mind.
   He remembered the first time he sat in meditation when he was nine years old,
beneath the cool shade of a rose-apple tree on the day of the year’s first plowing.
He remembered how the refreshing ease of that sitting had brought him a sense
of clarity and calm. He recalled, as well, his meditation in the forest right after
Channa had left him. He thought back to his first days with Master Alara
Kalama—those initial sessions of meditation had nourished both body and mind,
creating in him a deep ability to concentrate and focus. But after that, Master
Alara Kalama had told him to transcend the joys of meditation in order to attain
to states that existed beyond the material world, states such as the realms of
limitless space and limitless consciousness, and the state of no materiality. Later,
there had been the state of neither perception nor non-perception. Always the
goal had been to find a means to escape the world of feeling and thought, the
world of sensation and perception. He asked himself, “Why follow only the
traditions laid down in scripture? Why fear the joyful ease that meditation
brings? Such joys have nothing in common with the five categories of desire
which obscure awareness. To the contrary, the joys of meditation can nourish
body and mind and provide the strength needed to pursue the path to
enlightenment.”
   The monk Gautama resolved to regain his health and to use his meditation to
nourish both body and mind. He would beg for food again starting the next


morning. He would be his own teacher, not depending on the teachings of
anyone else. Happy with this decision, he stretched out on a mound of earth and
peacefully drifted off to sleep. The full moon had just risen in a cloudless sky,
and the Milky Way stretched clear and radiant across the heavens.
   The monk Gautama awoke the next morning to the sound of birds singing. He
stood up and recalled his decisions of the previous night. He was covered with
dirt and dust, and his robe was so tattered and threadbare it no longer covered his
body. He remembered seeing a corpse in the cemetery the day before, and he
guessed that today or tomorrow people would lift it down to the river to perform
the cremation ceremony, and the brick-colored cloth that covered it would no
longer be needed. He approached the corpse and, reflecting quietly on birth and
death, respectfully removed the cloth from the body. The corpse was that of a
young woman, her body swollen and discolored. Siddhartha would use the brick-
colored cloth as a new robe.
   He walked to the river to bathe himself and at the same time to wash the cloth.
The water was cool, and Siddhartha found it overwhelmingly refreshing. He
enjoyed the pleasant feeling of the water on his skin, welcoming the sensation
with a new state of mind. He took a long time bathing, and then he scrubbed and
wrung out his new robe. But as he went to climb out of the water, his strength
failed him. He did not have enough energy to pull himself onto the bank. He
stood quietly and breathed calmly. To one side he saw a tree branch leaning over
the water, its leaves skimming the surface. He walked towards it slowly and
grabbed onto it to support himself while he climbed out of the water.
But as Siddhartha went to climb out of the water, his strength failed him.


   He sat down to rest on the riverbank as the sun climbed higher into the sky.
He spread out the cloth to dry in the hot sun, and when the cloth was dry,
Siddhartha wrapped it around himself and set out for the village of Uruvela. But
before he had walked even half-way, his strength failed him, and, unable to catch
his breath, he collapsed.
   He lay unconscious for some time before a young girl from the village
appeared. Thirteen-year-old Sujata had been sent by her mother to carry rice-
milk, cakes, and lotus seeds to offer to the forest gods. When she saw the monk
lying unconscious on the road, barely breathing, she knelt down and placed a
bowl of milk to his lips. She knew he was an ascetic who had fainted from


weakness.
   When the drops of milk moistened his tongue and throat, Siddhartha
responded immediately. He could taste how refreshing the milk was, and he
slowly drank the entire bowlful. After a few dozen breaths he was revived
enough to sit up, and he motioned Sujata to pour him another bowlful of milk. It
was remarkable how quickly the milk restored his strength. That day he decided
to abandon austerity practice and go to the cool forest across the river to practice
there.
   During the days that followed, he gradually began to eat and drink normally.
Sometimes Sujata brought him food offerings, sometimes he took his bowl into
the village to beg. Every day he practiced walking meditation along the
riverbank, and the rest of the time he devoted to sitting meditation. Every
evening he bathed in the Neranjara River. He abandoned all reliance on tradition
and scripture in order to find the Way on his own. He returned to himself to learn
from his own successes and failures. He did not hesitate to let meditation nourish
his mind and body, and a sense of peace and ease grew within him. He did not
distance himself or try to escape his feelings and perceptions, but maintained
mindfulness in order to observe them as they arose.
   He abandoned the desire to escape the world of phenomena, and as he
returned to himself, he found he was completely present to the world of
phenomena. One breath, one bird’s song, one leaf, one ray of sunlight—any of
these might serve as his subject of meditation. He began to see that the key to
liberation lay in each breath, each step, each small pebble along the path.
   The monk Gautama went from meditating on his body to meditating on his
feelings, and from meditating on his feelings to meditating on his perceptions,
including all the thoughts which rose and fell in his own mind. He saw the
oneness of body and mind, that each and every cell of the body contained all the
wisdom of the universe. He saw that he needed only to look deeply into a speck
of dust to see the true face of the entire universe, that the speck of dust was itself
the universe and if it did not exist, the universe could not exist either. The monk
Gautama went beyond the idea of a separate self, of atman, and, with a start,
realized that he had long been dominated by a false view of atman as expounded
in the Vedas. In reality, all things were without a separate self. Non-self, or
anatman, was the nature of all existence. Anatman was not a term to describe
some new entity. It was a thunderbolt that destroyed all wrong views. Taking
hold of non-self, Siddhartha was like a general raising his sharp sword of insight
on the battlefield of meditation practice. Day and night he sat beneath the


pippala tree, as new levels of awareness awoke in him like bright flashes of
lightning.
   During this time, Siddhartha’s five friends lost faith in him. They saw him
sitting along the river bank eating food offerings. They watched him speak and
smile to a young girl, enjoy milk and rice, and carry his bowl down into the
village. Kondanna said to the others, “Siddhartha is no longer someone we can
rely on. He has abandoned the path half-way. He now concerns himself only
with idly feeding his body. We should leave him and seek another place to
continue our practice. I see no reason to continue here.”
   Only after his five friends had departed, did Siddhartha notice their absence.
Encouraged by his new insights, Siddhartha had devoted all his time to
meditation and had not yet taken the time to explain this to his friends. He
thought, “My friends have misunderstood me, but I can’t worry now about
convincing them otherwise. I must devote myself to finding the true path. Once I
have found it, I will share it with them.” Then he returned to his daily practice.
   During those same days in which he made such great progress along the path,
the young buffalo boy Svasti appeared. Siddhartha cheerfully accepted the
handfuls of fresh grass the eleven-year-old boy offered him. Though Sujata,
Svasti, and their friends were still children, Siddhartha shared with them some of
his new understanding. He was happy to see how unschooled children from the
countryside could easily understand his discoveries. He was greatly heartened,
for he knew that the door of complete enlightenment would soon open wide. He
knew he held the wondrous key—the truth of the interdependent and non-self
nature of all things.


                              Chapter Sixteen
                          Was Yasodhara Sleeping?
Because he was from a poor family, Svasti had, of course, never gone to school.
Sujata taught him a few basics, but he still lacked skill with words, and while
recounting his story about the Buddha, he sometimes halted, unable to find the
right words. His listeners assisted him. In addition to Ananda and Rahula, two
others came to listen to his story. One was an elderly nun named Mahapajapati
and the other was a monk in his early forties named Assaji.
   Rahula introduced them both to Svasti, who was deeply touched to learn that
Mahapajapati was herself Queen Gotami, the Buddha’s aunt who had raised him
from infancy. She was the first woman to be accepted as a nun in the Buddha’s
sangha, and she now served as abbess to more than seven hundred nuns. She had
just traveled from the north to visit the Buddha and to consult with him
concerning precepts for the bhikkhunis. Svasti learned that she had arrived only
the previous evening, and her grandson, Rahula, knowing how much she would
enjoy hearing all Svasti had to say about the Buddha’s days in Uruvela forest,
had invited her to join them. Svasti placed his palms together and bowed low
before the abbess. Remembering all the Buddha had told him about her filled his
heart with deep affection and respect. Mahapajapati looked at Svasti with the
same loving warmth as she looked at her own grandson, Rahula.
   Rahula introduced Assaji to Svasti, and Svasti’s eyes lit up when he learned
that Assaji was one of the five friends who had practiced self-mortification with
the Buddha near Svasti’s own home. The Buddha had told him back then that
when his friends saw he had abandoned austerities to drink milk and eat rice,
they left him to practice elsewhere. Svasti wondered how Assaji had come to be
of the Buddha’s disciples, living right here at Bamboo Forest Monastery. He
would ask Rahula about it later.
   Bhikkhuni Gotami assisted Svasti the most in his efforts to tell his tale. She
asked questions about details that didn’t seem important to him but were of
obvious interest to her. She asked where he had cut the kusa grass he offered the
Buddha for a meditation cushion and how often he had provided new bundles of
grass for the Buddha. She wanted to know if after giving the Buddha the grass,


the buffaloes still had enough to eat at night. And she asked if he was ever
beaten by the buffaloes’ owner.
   Much remained to be told, but Svasti asked permission to stop there for the
evening and promised to continue the following day. But before taking his leave,
he wondered if he could ask Bhikkhuni Gotami a few questions he had held in
his heart for ten years. She smiled at him and said, “Go ahead and ask. If I am
able to answer your questions, I will be most happy to.”
   There were several things Svasti wanted to know. First of all, had Yasodhara
really been sleeping or only pretending to be asleep the night Siddhartha pulled
back the curtain before his departure? Svasti also wanted to know what the king,
queen, and Yasodhara thought and said when Channa returned with Siddhartha’s
sword, necklace, and locks of hair. What happened in the lives of the Buddha’s
family in the six years of his absence? Who first heard the news that the Buddha
had attained the Way? Who first welcomed the Buddha back, and did all the city
come out to greet him when he returned to Kapilavatthu?
   “You do have a lot of questions!” exclaimed Bhikkhuni Gotami. She smiled
kindly at Svasti. “Let me try to answer them briefly. First of all, was Yasodhara
truly asleep or not? If you want to know for certain, you should ask Yasodhara,
but if you ask me, I don’t believe she was. Yasodhara herself had prepared
Siddhartha’s garments, hat, and shoes, and placed them on his chair. She told
Channa to saddle and ready Kanthaka. She knew that the prince would leave that
very night. How could she sleep on such a night? I believe she only pretended to
be asleep in order to avoid a painful parting for Siddhartha and herself. You do
not yet know Yasodhara, Svasti, but Rahula’s mother is a woman of great
determination. She understood Siddhartha’s intent and quietly gave him her
wholehearted support. I know this more clearly than anyone else, for of all those
close to Yasodhara, I was the closest, next to Siddhartha.”
   Bhikkhuni Gotami told Svasti that the following morning when it was
discovered that Siddhartha had left, everyone, except Yasodhara, was in a state
of shock. King Suddhodana flew into a rage and yelled at everyone, blaming
them for not preventing the prince from leaving. Queen Gotami ran at once to
find Yasodhara. She found her sitting quietly and weeping. Official search
parties were sent out on horseback in all four directions with orders to return
with the prince if they found him. The southbound party met Channa returning
with the riderless Kanthaka. Channa stopped them from going any further. He
said, “Leave the prince in peace to follow his spiritual path. I have already wept
and pleaded with him, but he is intent on seeking the Way. Anyway, he has


entered the deep forests which lie in another country’s territory. You cannot seek
him there.”
   When Channa returned to the palace, he lowered his head to the ground three
times as a sign of remorse and took the sword, necklace, and locks of hair to give
to the king. At that moment, Queen Gotami and Yasodhara were by the king’s
side. Seeing Channa’s tears, the king did not rebuke him, but slowly asked about
all that had taken place. He told Channa to give the sword, necklace, and hair to
Yasodhara for safekeeping. The atmosphere in the palace was dreary. Losing the
prince was like losing the light of day. The king retired to his quarters and
refused to come out for many days. His minister Vessamitta was obliged to
handle all palace matters on his behalf.
   After being returned to his stall, Kanthaka refused to eat or drink, and died a
few days later. Overcome with grief, Channa asked Yasodhara’s permission to
provide a ritual cremation for the prince’s horse.
   Bhikkhuni Gotami had recounted events up to that point when the bell for
meditation rang. Everyone looked disappointed, but Ananda said they should not
skip meditation, no matter how good the stories were. He invited them all to
return the following day to his hut. Svasti and Rahula joined their palms and
bowed to Bhikkhuni Gotami, Ananda and Assaji before returning to the hut of
their teacher, Sariputta. The two young friends walked side by side without
speaking. The slow reverberations of the bell gained momentum like waves
breaking one upon another. Svasti followed his breath and silently recited the
gatha for hearing the bell: “Listen, listen, this wonderful sound brings me back
to my true self.”


                              Chapter Seventeen
                                    Pippala Leaf
Beneath the pippala tree, the hermit Gautama focused all of his formidable
powers of concentration to look deeply at his body. He saw that each cell of his
body was like a drop of water in an endlessly flowing river of birth, existence,
and death, and he could not find anything in the body that remained unchanged
or that could be said to contain a separate self. Intermingled with the river of his
body was the river of feelings in which every feeling was a drop of water. These
drops also jostled with one another in a process of birth, existence, and death.
Some feelings were pleasant, some unpleasant, and some neutral, but all of his
feelings were impermanent: they appeared and disappeared just like the cells of
his body.
   With his great concentration, Gautama next explored the river of perceptions
which flowed alongside the rivers of body and feelings. The drops in the river of
perceptions intermingled and influenced each other in their process of birth,
existence, and death. If one’s perceptions were accurate, reality revealed itself
with ease; but if one’s perceptions were erroneous, reality was veiled. People
were caught in endless suffering because of their erroneous perceptions: they
believed that which is impermanent is permanent, that which is without self
contains self, that which has no birth and death has birth and death, and they
divided that which is inseparable into parts.
   Gautama next shone his awareness on the mental states which were the
sources of suffering—fear, anger, hatred, arrogance, jealousy, greed, and
ignorance. Mindful awareness blazed in him like a bright sun, and he used that
sun of awareness to illuminate the nature of all these negative mental states. He
saw that they all arose due to ignorance. They were the opposite of mindfulness.
They were darkness—the absence of light. He saw that the key to liberation
would be to break through ignorance and to enter deeply into the heart of reality
and attain a direct experience of it. Such knowledge would not be the knowledge
of the intellect, but of direct experience.
   In the past, Siddhartha had looked for ways to vanquish fear, anger, and greed,
but the methods he had used had not borne fruit because they were only attempts


to suppress such feelings and emotions. Siddhartha now understood that their
cause was ignorance, and that when one was liberated from ignorance, mental
obstructions would vanish on their own, like shadows fleeing before the rising
sun. Siddhartha’s insight was the fruit of his deep concentration.
   He smiled, and looked up at a pippala leaf imprinted against the blue sky, its
tail blowing back and forth as if calling him. Looking deeply at the leaf, he saw
clearly the presence of the sun and stars—without the sun, without light and
warmth, the leaf could not exist. This was like this, because that was like that.
He also saw in the leaf the presence of clouds—without clouds there could be no
rain, and without rain the leaf could not be. He saw the earth, time, space, and
mind—all were present in the leaf. In fact, at that very moment, the entire
universe existed in that leaf. The reality of the leaf was a wondrous miracle.
   Though we ordinarily think that a leaf is born in the springtime, Gautama
could see that it had been there for a long, long time in the sunlight, the clouds,
the tree, and in himself. Seeing that the leaf had never been born, he could see
that he too had never been born. Both the leaf and he himself had simply
manifested—they had never been born and were incapable of ever dying. With
this insight, ideas of birth and death, appearance and disappearance dissolved,
and the true face of the leaf and his own true face revealed themselves. He could
see that the presence of any one phenomenon made possible the existence of all
other phenomena. One included all, and all were contained in one.
   The leaf and his body were one. Neither possessed a separate, permanent self.
Neither could exist independently from the rest of the universe. Seeing the
interdependent nature of all phenomena, Siddhartha saw the empty nature of all
phenomena—that all things are empty of a separate, isolated self. He realized
that the key to liberation lay in these two principles of interdependence and non-
self. Clouds drifted across the sky, forming a white background to the translucent
pippala leaf. Perhaps that evening the clouds would encounter a cold front and
transform into rain. Clouds were one manifestation; rain was another. Clouds
also were not born and would not die. If the clouds understood that, Gautama
thought, surely they would sing joyfully as they fell down as rain onto the
mountains, forests, and rice fields.
   Illuminating the rivers of his body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations,
and consciousness, Siddhartha now understood that impermanence and
emptiness of self are the very conditions necessary for life. Without
impermanence and emptiness of self, nothing could grow or develop. If a grain
of rice did not have the nature of impermanence and emptiness of self, it could


not grow into a rice plant. If clouds were not empty of self and impermanent,
they could not transform into rain. Without an impermanent, non-self nature, a
child could never grow into an adult. “Thus,” he thought, “to accept life means
to accept impermanence and emptiness of self. The source of suffering is a false
belief in permanence and the existence of separate selves. Seeing this, one
understands that there is neither birth nor death, production nor destruction, one
nor many, inner nor outer, large nor small, impure nor pure. All such concepts
are false distinctions created by the intellect. If one penetrates into the empty
nature of all things, one will transcend all mental barriers, and be liberated from
the cycle of suffering.”
   From one night to the next, Gautama meditated beneath the pippala tree,
shining the light of his awareness on his body, his mind, and all the universe. His
five companions had long abandoned him, and his co-practitioners were now the
forest, the river, the birds, and the thousands of insects living on the earth and in
the trees. The great pippala tree was his brother in practice. The evening star
which appeared as he sat down in meditation each night was also his brother in
practice. He meditated far into the night.
   The village children came to visit him only in the early afternoons. One day
Sujata brought him an offering of rice porridge cooked with milk and honey, and
Svasti brought him a fresh armful of kusa grass. After Svasti left to lead the
buffaloes home, Gautama was seized with a deep feeling that he would attain the
Great Awakening that very night. Only the previous night he had had several
unusual dreams. In one he saw himself lying on his side, his knees brushing
against the Himalayas, his left hand touching the shores of the Eastern Sea, his
right hand touching the shores of the Western Sea, and his two feet resting
against the shores of the Southern Sea. In another dream, a great lotus as large as
a carriage wheel grew from his navel and floated up to touch the highest clouds.
In a third dream, birds of all colors, too many to be counted, flew towards him
from all directions. These dreams seemed to announce that his Great Awakening
was at hand.
   Early that evening, Gautama did walking meditation along the banks of the
river. He waded into the water and bathed. When twilight descended, he returned
to sit beneath his familiar pippala tree. He smiled as he looked at the newly
spread kusa grass at the foot of the tree. Beneath this very tree he had already
made so many important discoveries in his meditation. Now the moment he had
long awaited was approaching. The door to Enlightenment was about to open.
   Slowly, Siddhartha sat down in the lotus position. He looked at the river


flowing quietly in the distance as soft breezes rustled the grasses along its banks.
The night forest was tranquil yet very much alive. Around him chirped a
thousand different insects. He turned his awareness to his breath and lightly
closed his eyes. The evening star appeared in the sky.


                              Chapter Eighteen
                         The Morning Star Has Risen
Through mindfulness, Siddhartha’s mind, body, and breath were perfectly at one.
His practice of mindfulness had enabled him to build great powers of
concentration which he could now use to shine awareness on his mind and body.
After deeply entering meditation, he began to discern the presence of countless
other beings in his own body right in the present moment. Organic and inorganic
beings, minerals, mosses and grasses, insects, animals, and people were all
within him. He saw that other beings were himself right in the present moment.
He saw his own past lives, all his births and deaths. He saw the creation and
destruction of thousands of worlds and thousands of stars. He felt all the joys
and sorrows of every living being—those born of mothers, those born of eggs,
and those born of fission, who divided themselves into new creatures. He saw
that every cell of his body contained all of Heaven and Earth, and spanned the
three times—past, present, and future. It was the hour of the first watch of the
night.
   Gautama entered even more deeply into meditation. He saw how countless
worlds arose and fell, were created and destroyed. He saw how countless beings
pass through countless births and deaths. He saw that these births and deaths
were but outward appearances and not true reality, just as millions of waves rise
and fall incessantly on the surface of the sea, while the sea itself is beyond birth
and death. If the waves understood that they themselves were water, they would
transcend birth and death and arrive at true inner peace, overcoming all fear.
This realization enabled Gautama to transcend the net of birth and death, and he
smiled. His smile was like a flower blossoming in the deep night which radiated
a halo of light. It was the smile of a wondrous understanding, the insight into the
destruction of all defilements. He attained this level of understanding by the
second watch.
   At just that moment thunder crashed, and great bolts of lightning flashed
across the sky as if to rip the heavens in two. Black clouds concealed the moon
and stars. Rain poured down. Gautama was soaking wet, but he did not budge.
He continued his meditation.


   Without wavering, he shined his awareness on his mind. He saw that living
beings suffer because they do not understand that they share one common
ground with all beings. Ignorance gives rise to a multitude of sorrows,
confusions, and troubles. Greed, anger, arrogance, doubt, jealousy, and fear all
have their roots in ignorance. When we learn to calm our minds in order to look
deeply at the true nature of things, we can arrive at full understanding which
dissolves every sorrow and anxiety and gives rise to acceptance and love.
   Gautama now saw that understanding and love are one. Without
understanding there can be no love. Each person’s disposition is the result of
physical, emotional, and social conditions. When we understand this, we cannot
hate even a person who behaves cruelly, but we can strive to help transform his
physical, emotional, and social conditions. Understanding gives rise to
compassion and love, which in turn give rise to correct action. In order to love, it
is first necessary to understand, so understanding is the key to liberation. In
order to attain clear understanding, it is necessary to live mindfully, making
direct contact with life in the present moment, truly seeing what is taking place
within and outside of oneself. Practicing mindfulness strengthens the ability to
look deeply, and when we look deeply into the heart of anything, it will reveal
itself. This is the secret treasure of mindfulness—it leads to the realization of
liberation and enlightenment. Life is illuminated by right understanding, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration. Siddhartha called this the Noble Path:
aryamarga.
   Looking deeply into the heart of all beings, Siddhartha attained insight into
everyone’s minds, no matter where they were, and he was able to hear
everyone’s cries of both suffering and joy. He attained to the states of divine
sight, divine hearing, and the ability to travel across all distances without
moving. It was now the end of the third watch, and there was no more thunder.
The clouds rolled back to reveal the bright moon and stars.
   Gautama felt as though a prison which had confined him for thousands of
lifetimes had broken open. Ignorance had been the jailkeeper. Because of
ignorance, his mind had been obscured, just like the moon and stars hidden by
the storm clouds. Clouded by endless waves of deluded thoughts, the mind had
falsely divided reality into subject and object, self and others, existence and non-
existence, birth and death, and from these discriminations arose wrong views—
the prisons of feelings, craving, grasping, and becoming. The suffering of birth,
old age, sickness, and death only made the prison walls thicker. The only thing


to do was to seize the jailkeeper and see his true face. The jailkeeper was
ignorance. And the means to overcome ignorance were the Noble Eightfold
Path. Once the jailkeeper was gone, the jail would disappear and never be rebuilt
again.
   The hermit Gautama smiled, and whispered to himself, “O jailer, I see you
now. How many lifetimes have you confined me in the prisons of birth and
death? But now I see your face clearly, and from now on you can build no more
prisons around me.”
   Looking up, Siddhartha saw the morning star appear on the horizon, twinkling
like a huge diamond. He had seen this star so many times before while sitting
beneath the pippala tree, but this morning it was like seeing it for the first time. It
was as dazzling as the jubilant smile of Enlightenment. Siddhartha gazed at the
star and exclaimed out of deep compassion, “All beings contain within
themselves the seeds of Enlightenment, and yet we drown in the ocean of birth
and death for so many thousands of lifetimes!”
   Siddhartha knew he had found the Great Way. He had attained his goal, and
now his heart experienced perfect peace and ease. He thought about his years of
searching, filled with disappointments and hardships. He thought of his father,
mother, aunt, Yasodhara, Rahula, and all his friends. He thought of the palace,
Kapilavatthu, his people and country, and of all those who lived in hardship and
poverty, especially children. He promised to find a way to share his discovery to
help all others liberate themselves from suffering. Out of his deep insight
emerged a profound love for all beings.
   Along the grassy riverbank, colorful flowers blossomed in the early morning
sunlight. Sun danced on leaves and sparkled on the water. His pain was gone. All
the wonders of life revealed themselves. Everything appeared strangely new.
How wondrous were the blue skies and drifting white clouds! He felt as though
he and all the universe had been newly created.
   Just then, Svasti appeared. When Siddhartha saw the young buffalo boy come
running towards him, he smiled. Suddenly Svasti stopped in his tracks and stared
at Siddhartha, his mouth wide open. Siddhartha called, “Svasti!”
   The boy came to his senses and answered, “Teacher!”
   Svasti joined his palms and bowed. He took a few steps forward but then
stopped and gazed again at Siddhartha in awe. Embarrassed by his own behavior,
he spoke haltingly, “Teacher, you look so different today.”
   Siddhartha motioned for the boy to approach. He took him into his arms and
asked, “How do I look different today?”


  Svasti joined his palms and said, haltingly, “Teacher, you look so different
today.”
  Gazing up at Siddhartha, Svasti answered, “It’s hard to say. It’s just you look
so different. It’s like, like you were a star.”
  Siddhartha patted the boy on the head and said, “Is that so? What else do I
look like?”
  “You look like a lotus that’s just blossomed. And like, like the moon over the
Gayasisa Peak.”
  Siddhartha looked into Svasti’s eyes and said, “Why, you’re a poet, Svasti!
Now tell me, why are you here so early today? And where are your buffaloes?”
  Svasti explained that he had the day off as all the buffaloes were being used to
plow the fields. Only the calf had been left in its stall. Today his only


responsibility was to cut grass. During the night he and his sisters and brother
were awakened by the roar of thunder. Rain pounded through their leaky roof,
soaking their beds. They had never experienced a storm so fierce, and they
worried about Siddhartha in the forest. They huddled together until the storm
subsided and they could fall back asleep. When day broke, Svasti ran to the
buffaloes’ stall to fetch his sickle and carrying pole, and made his way to the
forest to see if Siddhartha was alright.
   Siddhartha grasped Svasti’s hand. “This is the happiest day I have ever
known. If you can, bring all the children to come see me by the pippala tree this
afternoon. Don’t forget to bring your brother and sisters. But first go and cut the
kusa grass you need for the buffaloes.”
   Svasti trotted off happily as Siddhartha began to take slow steps along the sun-
bathed shore.


                              Chapter Nineteen
                           Tangerine of Mindfulness
When Sujata brought Siddhartha’s food that noon, she found him sitting beneath
the pippala tree as beautiful as a young morning. His face and body radiated
peace, joy, and equanimity. She had seen him sitting solemnly and majestically
beneath the pippala tree over a hundred times, and yet today there was
something different about him. Looking at Siddhartha, Sujata felt all her sorrows
and worries vanish. Happiness as fresh as a spring breeze filled her heart. She
felt there was nothing else she needed or wanted on this Earth, that everything in
the universe was already good and beneficial, and that no one needed to worry or
despair anymore. Sujata took a few steps forward and placed the food before
Siddhartha. She bowed before him. She felt the peace and joy within Siddhartha
enter herself.
   Siddhartha smiled at her and said, “Here, sit down with me. I thank you for
bringing me food and water these past months. Today is the happiest day of my
life because last night I found the Great Way. Please enjoy this happiness too. In
the near future I will go teach this path to all others.”
   Sujata looked up with surprise. “You will be going? You mean you will leave
us?”
   Siddhartha smiled kindly. “Yes, I must leave, but I won’t abandon you
children. Before I leave, I will show you the path I have discovered.”
   Sujata was not very reassured. She wanted to ask him more, but he spoke first,
“I will remain with you children for at least several more days in order to share
what I have learned with you. Only then will I take to the road. But that doesn’t
mean I will be apart from you forever. From time to time, I will return to visit
you children.”
   Sujata felt comforted. She sat down and opened the banana leaf to reveal the
offering of rice. She sat silently at Siddhartha’s side as he ate. She watched as he
broke off pieces of rice and dipped them in sesame salt. Her heart was filled with
inexpressible happiness.
   When he finished eating, Siddhartha asked Sujata to return home. He said he
wanted to meet with the village children that afternoon in the forest.


   Many children came, including Svasti’s brother and sisters. The boys had all
bathed and put on clean clothes. The girls wore their loveliest saris. Sujata’s sari
was ivory colored, Nandabala wore a sari the color of banana shoots, and
Bhima’s sari was pink. The children, looking as fresh and colorful as flowers, sat
around Siddhartha beneath the pippala tree.
   Sujata brought a basketful of coconut and chunks of palm sugar as a special
treat. The children scooped out the tasty coconut meat and ate it with the
delicious sugar. Nandabala and Subash brought a basketful of tangerines.
Siddhartha sat with the children, his happiness complete. Rupak offered him a
chunk of coconut with a piece of palm sugar on a pippala leaf. Nandabala
offered him a tangerine. Siddhartha accepted their offerings and ate with the
children.
   They were still enjoying their lunch when Sujata made an announcement,
“Dear friends, today is the happiest day our Teacher has ever known. He has
discovered the Great Way. I feel this is also a very important day for me.
Brothers and sisters, let us consider this a day of great jubilation for us all. We
are here today to celebrate the Enlightenment of our Teacher. Respected Teacher,
the Great Path has been found. We know you cannot stay with us forever. Please
teach us the things you think we might be able to understand.”
In mindfulness, the children passed around the basket of tangerines.


   Sujata joined her palms together and bowed to Gautama to express her respect
and devotion. Nandabala and the other children also joined their palms and
bowed with deepest sincerity.
   Siddhartha quietly gestured for the children to sit back up and he said, “You
are all intelligent children and I am sure you will be able to understand and
practice the things I will share with you. The Great Path I have discovered is
deep and subtle, but anyone willing to apply his or her heart and mind can
understand and follow it.
   “When you children peel a tangerine, you can eat it with awareness or without
awareness. What does it mean to eat a tangerine in awareness? When you are


eating the tangerine, you are aware that you are eating the tangerine. You fully
experience its lovely fragrance and sweet taste. When you peel the tangerine,
you know that you are peeling the tangerine; when you remove a slice and put it
in your mouth, you know that you are removing a slice and putting it in your
mouth; when you experience the lovely fragrance and sweet taste of the
tangerine, you are aware that you are experiencing the lovely fragrance and
sweet taste of the tangerine. The tangerine Nandabala offered me had nine
sections. I ate each morsel in awareness and saw how precious and wonderful it
was. I did not forget the tangerine, and thus the tangerine became something
very real to me. If the tangerine is real, the person eating it is real. That is what it
means to eat a tangerine in awareness.
    “Children, what does it mean to eat a tangerine without awareness? When you
are eating the tangerine, you do not know that you are eating the tangerine. You
do not experience the lovely fragrance and sweet taste of the tangerine. When
you peel the tangerine, you do not know that you are peeling the tangerine; when
you remove a slice and put it in your mouth, you do not know that you are
removing a slice and putting it in your mouth; when you smell the fragrance or
taste the tangerine, you do not know that you are smelling the fragrance and
tasting the tangerine. Eating a tangerine in such a way, you cannot appreciate its
precious and wonderful nature. If you are not aware that you are eating the
tangerine, the tangerine is not real. If the tangerine is not real, the person eating
it is not real either. Children, that is eating a tangerine without awareness.
    “Children, eating the tangerine in mindfulness means that while eating the
tangerine you are truly in touch with it. Your mind is not chasing after thoughts
of yesterday or tomorrow, but is dwelling fully in the present moment. The
tangerine is truly present. Living in mindful awareness means to live in the
present moment, your mind and body dwelling in the very here and now.
    “A person who practices mindfulness can see things in the tangerine that
others are unable to see. An aware person can see the tangerine tree, the
tangerine blossom in the spring, the sunlight and rain which nourished the
tangerine. Looking deeply, one can see ten thousand things which have made the
tangerine possible. Looking at a tangerine, a person who practices awareness can
see all the wonders of the universe and how all things interact with one another.
Children, our daily life is just like a tangerine. Just as a tangerine is comprised of
sections, each day is comprised of twenty-four hours. One hour is like one
section of tangerine. Living all twenty-four hours of a day is like eating all the
sections of a tangerine. The path I have found is the path of living each hour of


the day in awareness, mind and body always dwelling in the present moment.
The opposite is to live in forgetfulness. If we live in forgetfulness, we do not
know that we are alive. We do not fully experience life because our mind and
body are not dwelling in the here and now.”
   Gautama looked at Sujata and said her name.
   “Yes, Teacher?” Sujata joined her palms.
   “Do you a think a person who lives in awareness will make many errors or
few?”
   “Respected Teacher, a person who lives in awareness will make few errors.
My mother always tells me that a girl should pay attention to how she walks,
stands, speaks, laughs, and works, in order to avoid thoughts, words, and actions
that might cause sorrow to herself or others.”
   “Just so, Sujata. A person who lives in awareness knows what she is thinking,
saying, and doing. Such a person can avoid thoughts, words, and actions that
cause suffering for herself and others.
   “Children, living in awareness means to live in the present moment. One is
aware of what is taking place within one’s self and in one’s surroundings. One is
in direct contact with life. If one continues to live in such a way, one will be able
to deeply understand one’s self and one’s surroundings. Understanding leads to
tolerance and love. When all beings understand one another, they will accept and
love one another. Then there will not be much suffering in the world. What do
you think, Svasti? Can people love if they are unable to understand?”
   “Respected Teacher, without understanding love is most difficult. It reminds
me of something that happened to my sister Bhima. One night she cried all night
long until my sister Bala lost her patience and spanked Bhima. That only made
Bhima cry more. I picked Bhima up and sensed that she was feverish. I was sure
her head ached from the fever. I called Bala and told her to place her hand on
Bhima’s forehead. When she did that she understood at once why Bhima was
crying. Her eyes softened and she took Bhima into her arms and sang to her with
love. Bhima stopped crying even though she still had a fever. Respected Teacher,
I think that was because Bala understood why Bhima was upset. And so I think
that without understanding, love is not possible.”
   “Just so, Svasti! Love is possible only when there is understanding. And only
with love can there be acceptance. Practice living in awareness, children, and
you will deepen your understanding. You will be able to understand yourselves,
other people, and all things. And you will have hearts of love. That is the
wonderful path I have discovered.”


   Svasti joined his palms. “Respected Teacher, could we call this path the ‘Path
of Awareness’?”
   Siddhartha smiled, “Surely. We can call it the Path of Awareness. I like that
very much. The Path of Awareness leads to perfect Awakening.”
   Sujata joined her palms to ask permission to speak. “You are the awakened
one, the one who shows how to live in awareness. Can we call you the
‘Awakened One’?”
   Siddhartha nodded. “That would please me very much.”
   Sujata’s eyes shone. She continued, “‘Awaken’ in Magadhi is pronounced
‘budh.’ A person who is awakened would be called ‘Buddha’ in Magadhi. We
can call you ‘Buddha.’”
   Siddhartha nodded. All the children were delighted. Fourteen-year-old Nalaka,
the oldest boy in the group, spoke, “Respected Buddha, we are very happy to
receive your teaching on the Path of Awareness. Sujata has told me how you
have meditated beneath this pippala tree for the past six months and how just last
night you attained the Great Awakening. Respected Buddha, this pippala tree is
the most beautiful one in all the forest. Can we call it the ‘Tree of Awakening,’
the ‘Bodhi Tree’? The word ‘bodhi’ shares the same root as the word ‘buddha’
and also means awakening.”
   Gautama nodded his head. He was delighted, too. He had not guessed that
during this gathering with the children the path, himself, and even the great tree
would all receive special names. Nandabala joined his palms. “It is growing dark
and we must return to our homes, but we will come back to receive more of your
teaching soon.” The children all stood and joined their palms like lotus buds to
thank the Buddha. They strolled home chattering like a flock of happy birds. The
Buddha was happy, too. He decided to stay in the forest for a longer period of
time in order to explore ways to best sow the seeds of Awakening and to allow
himself, as well, special time to enjoy the great peace and joy that attaining the
path had brought him.


                              Chapter Twenty
                                    The Deer
Every day the Buddha bathed in the Neranjara River. He did walking meditation
along the riverbanks and along the small forest paths his own steps had created.
He sat in meditation on the shore beside the flowing river or beneath the bodhi
tree while hundreds of birds chirped among its branches. He had realized his
vow. He knew he must return to Kapilavatthu where so many awaited news of
his quest. He recalled, as well, King Bimbisara in the city of Rajagaha. He felt a
special affinity for the young king and wished to visit him also. There were also
his five former companions. He knew they each possessed the ability to attain
liberation quickly, and he wanted to find them. No doubt they still dwelled
nearby.
   River, sky, moon and stars, mountains, forest, every blade of grass, and every
mote of dust were transformed for the Buddha. He knew that the long years he
wandered in search of the Way had not been wasted. Indeed, thanks to his trials
and hardships, he had finally discovered the Way in his own heart. Every living
being possessed the heart of enlightenment. The seeds of enlightenment existed
in everyone. Living beings did not need to seek enlightenment outside of
themselves because all the wisdom and strength of the universe was already
present in them. This was the Buddha’s great discovery and was cause for all to
rejoice.
   The children came to visit him often. The Buddha was happy to see that the
way of liberation could be expressed simply and naturally. Even poor country
children who had never attended school could understand his teaching. This
greatly encouraged him.
   One day the children arrived with a basketful of tangerines. They wanted to
eat the tangerines in awareness in order to practice the very first lesson the
Buddha had taught them. Sujata bowed gracefully before the Buddha and then
held the basket before him. He joined his palms together like a lotus bud and
took a tangerine. Sujata offered the basket to Svasti, who was sitting by the
Buddha’s side. He too joined his palms together and took a tangerine. She
offered the basket to each child until everyone had a tangerine. She sat down and


placed her palms together before taking a tangerine for herself. All the children
sat silently. The Buddha told them to follow their breath and smile. Then he
lifted his tangerine in his left hand and looked deeply at it. The children followed
his example. He slowly peeled his tangerine and the children began to peel
theirs. Teacher and students enjoyed their tangerines in silent awareness. When
everyone was finished eating, Bala gathered up the peels. The children had
greatly enjoyed eating their tangerines mindfully with the Buddha. The Buddha
took great pleasure in sharing such a practice with the children.
   The children visited the Buddha in the afternoons. He showed them how to sit
still and to follow their breath in order to calm their minds when they felt sad or
angry. He taught them walking meditation to refresh their minds and bodies. He
taught them to look deeply at others and at their own actions in order to be able
to see, to understand, and to love. The children understood all he taught them.
   Nandabala and Sujata spent an entire day sewing a new robe to offer the
Buddha. It was the color of bricks, similar to the cloth of the Buddha’s old robe.
When Sujata learned he had to take the cemetery cloth used to cover the corpse
of her former household servant, Radha, who died of typhoid fever, she wanted
to weep.
   The Buddha was sitting beneath the bodhi tree when the two girls arrived to
offer him the robe. They waited quietly for him to emerge from his meditation.
When they presented him with the new robe he was very happy.
   “I have need of this robe,” he said. He told them he would keep the old cloth,
as well, in order to have something to wear whenever he washed his new robe.
Nandabala and Sujata privately resolved to sew him another robe soon.
   One day, Sujata’s twelve-year-old girlfriend, Balagupta, asked the Buddha to
speak to them about friendship. Just the day before, Balagupta had had an
argument with her closest friend, Jatilika. She had not wanted to stop by
Jatilika’s house on her way to see the Buddha the following day and only did so
at Sujata’s insistence. Jatilika only agreed to join them because Sujata was there.
When the girls arrived at the bodhi tree, Balagupta and Jatilika sat far apart from
one another.
   The Buddha told the children about the friendship shared by a deer, a bird, and
a turtle. He told them that the story had taken place several thousand years
before, when he was a deer in a past life. The children looked surprised but he
explained, “In previous lives, we have all been earth, stones, dew, wind, water,
and fire. We have been mosses, grasses, trees, insects, fish, turtles, birds, and
mammals. I have seen this most clearly in my meditations. Thus, in one life, I


was a deer. This is quite an ordinary thing. I can still remember a life in which I
was a jagged rock upon a mountain peak and another life in which I was a
plumeria tree. It is the same for all of you. The story I am going to tell you is
about a deer, a bird, a turtle, and a hunter. Perhaps one of you was the bird and
another the turtle.
   “We have all existed in times when there were not yet any humans, or even
birds and mammals on Earth. There were only plants beneath the seas and trees
and vegetation on the Earth’s surface. In those times we may have been stones,
dew, or plants. Afterwards we experienced lives as birds, as all kinds of animals,
and finally as human beings. Right now we are more than just human beings. We
are rice plants, tangerines, rivers, and air, because without these things we could
not be. When you children look at rice plants, coconuts, tangerines, and water,
remember that in this life you depend upon many other beings for your
existence. These other beings are part of you. If you can see that, you will
experience true understanding and love.
   “Although the story I’m about to tell you took place several thousand years
ago, it could just as easily take place this very moment. Listen carefully and see
whether or not you have something in common with the animals in this story.”
   Then the Buddha began to tell his tale. At that time the Buddha was a deer
who lived in a forest which had a clear lake where the deer liked to drink. A
turtle lived in the lake’s waters and a magpie lived in the branches of a willow
tree beside the lake. Deer, Turtle, and Magpie were very close friends. One day,
a hunter followed day old tracks left by Deer that led to the edge of the lake.
There he left a trap made of strong ropes before returning to his hut on the
outskirts of the forest.
   Later that day when Deer came for a drink of water, he was caught by the trap.
He cried out and was heard by Turtle and Magpie. Turtle crawled out of the
water and Magpie flew down from her nest. They discussed how best to help
their friend get out of his predicament. Magpie said, “Sister Turtle, your jaws are
sturdy and strong. You can use them to chew and cut through these ropes. As for
me, I’ll find a way to prevent the hunter from coming back here.” Magpie then
flew off in haste.
   Turtle began to gnaw at the ropes. Magpie flew to the hunter’s hut and
perched on a mango branch outside his front door all night to wait for him.
When day broke, the hunter took a sharp knife and walked out his door. As soon
as she saw him, Magpie flew into his face with all her might. Struck in the face
by the bird, the hunter was momentarily dazed and went back inside his hut. He


lay down on the bed to rest a moment. When he got up he paused for a moment
and then, still clutching his sharp knife, went out the back door of his hut. But
clever Magpie had outguessed him. She was waiting at the back perched on a
jackfruit branch. Again she flew into his face, smacking him hard. Struck in the
face twice by a bird, the hunter went back into his house to think things over. He
decided it was an unlucky day and that perhaps it would be best to remain home
until the morrow.
   The next morning he rose early. He picked up his sharp knife and, as a
precaution, covered his face with a hat before he walked out the door. Seeing she
could no longer attack the hunter’s face, Magpie sped back to the forest to warn
her friends.
   “The hunter is on his way!”
   Turtle had almost chewed through the last of the ropes. But the last rope
seemed as hard as steel. Her jaws were raw and bloody from chewing nonstop
throughout two nights and a day. Still she did not stop. Just then the hunter
appeared. Frightened, Deer gave a mighty kick which broke through the last rope
and set him free. Deer ran into the forest. Magpie flew high into the willow tree.
But Turtle was so exhausted from her efforts that she could not move. The
hunter was angry to see the deer escape. He picked up the turtle and tossed her in
his leather sack which he left hanging on a branch of the willow tree. Then he
went off to find Deer.
   Deer stood concealed behind some bushes and so saw Turtle’s predicament.
“My friends risked their lives for me,” he thought, “now it is time for me to do
the same for them.” Deer stepped out in full view of the hunter. He pretended to
stumble as though very tired and then he turned away and hobbled weakly down
the path.
   The hunter thought, “The deer is almost out of strength. I will stalk it and soon
kill it with my knife.”
   The hunter pursued Deer deeper and deeper into the forest. Deer managed to
stay just out of the hunter’s reach. When they were far from the lake, Deer
suddenly broke into a run until he was out of the hunter’s sight. He covered his
hoof-prints and then returned to the lake. He used his antlers to lift the leather
bag off the branch and to shake Turtle out. Magpie joined her two friends.
   “You both saved me from sure death today at the hunter’s hand!” said Deer. “I
fear he will return here before long. Magpie, fly to a safer spot in the forest.
Sister Turtle, crawl back into the water and hide. I will run back into the forest.”
   When the hunter arrived back at the lake, he found his leather sack on the


ground, empty. Frustrated, he picked it up and still clutching his knife, trudged
home.
   The children had listened to the Buddha’s tale with wide-eyed interest. When
the Buddha described how raw and bloody Turtle’s jaws had become from
chewing the ropes to save her friend, Rupak and Subash almost cried. The
Buddha asked the children, “What do you think, children? Long ago, I was Deer.
Were any of you Turtle?”
   Four children raised their hand, including Sujata.
   The Buddha then asked, “And who among you was Magpie?”
   Svasti raised his hand as did Jatilika and Balagupta.
   Sujata looked at Jatilika and then at Balagupta. “If you were both Magpie, that
makes you one person. What good is it for Magpie to be mad at Magpie? Can’t
our friendship equal that of Magpie, Turtle, and Deer?”
   Balagupta stood up and walked over to Jatilika. She took her friend’s hand in
her own two hands. Jatilika pulled Balagupta into her arms and then slid over to
make a place for Balagupta to sit.
   The Buddha smiled. “You children understand the story well. Remember that
tales like the one I have just recounted are taking place all the time right in our
own daily lives.”
The Buddha lifted his robe to wade across the river, and then walked in
meditation to a lotus pond that he liked very much.




                          Chapter Twenty-One
                                The Lotus Pond
After the children returned home, the Buddha did walking meditation. He lifted
his robe to wade across the river, and then followed a path between two rice
fields that led to a lotus pond he liked very much. There he sat down and
contemplated the beautiful lotuses.
   As he looked at the lotus stems, leaves, and flowers, he thought of all the
different stages of a lotus’ growth. The roots remained buried in mud. Some
stems had not risen above the surface of the water while others had barely
emerged to reveal leaves still curled tightly shut. There were unopened lotus
flower buds, those with petals just beginning to peek out, and lotus flowers in
full bloom. There were seed pods from which all the petals had fallen. There
were white lotus flowers, blue ones, and pink ones. The Buddha reflected that
people were not very different from lotus flowers. Each person had his or her
own natural disposition. Devadatta was not like Ananda, Yasodhara was not the
same as Queen Pamita; Sujata was not like Bala. Personality, virtue, intelligence,
and talent varied widely among people. The Path of Liberation which the
Buddha had discovered needed to be expounded in many ways to suit many
kinds of people. Teaching the village children was so pleasant, he thought,
because he could speak to them in such a simple way.
   Different teaching methods were like gates by which different kinds of people
could enter and understand the teaching. The creation of “Dharma gates” would
result from direct encounters with people. There were no ready-made methods
miraculously received under the bodhi tree. The Buddha saw that it would be
necessary to return to society in order to set the wheel of Dharma in motion and
to sow the seeds of liberation. Forty-nine days had passed since his Awakening.
It was now time to depart from Uruvela. He decided to leave the following
morning, parting from the cool forest by the banks of the Neranjara River, the
bodhi tree, and the children. He wanted first to seek out his two teachers, Alara
Kalama and Uddaka Ramaputta. He was confident that they would attain
Awakening in no time at all. After assisting these two venerable men, he would
find the five friends who had practiced austerities with him. Then he would


return to Magadha to see King Bimbisara.
   The next morning, the Buddha put on his new robe and walked into Uruvela
while the morning air was still misty. He went to Svasti’s hut and told the young
buffalo boy and his family that the time had come for him to depart. The Buddha
patted each of the children gently on the head, and together they walked to
Sujata’s house. Sujata cried when she learned the news.
   The Buddha said, “I must leave in order to fulfil my responsibilities. But I
promise that I will return to visit you whenever I have a chance. You children
have helped me greatly, and I am grateful. Please remember and practice the
things I have shared with you. That way I will never be far from you. Sujata, dry
your tears now and give me a smile.”
   Sujata wiped her tears with the edge of her sari and tried to smile. Then the
children walked with the Buddha to the edge of the village. The Buddha was
turning to say farewell, when he noticed a young ascetic walking towards them.
The ascetic joined his palms in greeting and looked curiously at the Buddha.
After a long moment, he said, “Monk, you look most radiant and peaceful. What
is your name and who is your Master?”
   The Buddha answered, “My name is Siddhartha Gautama. I have studied with
many teachers, but no one is my teacher now. What is your name, and where are
you coming from?”
   The ascetic answered, “My name is Upaka. I have just left the center of
Master Uddaka Ramaputta.”
   “Is Master Uddaka in good health?”
   “Master Uddaka died just a few days ago.”
   The Buddha sighed. He would not have a chance to help his old teacher after
all. He asked, “Have you ever studied with Master Alara Kalama?”
   Upaka answered, “Yes. But he, too, has recently died.”
   “Do you by any chance know of a monk named Kondanna?”
   Upaka said, “Yes, indeed. I heard about Kondanna and four other monks when
I was living at Master Uddaka’s center. I heard they are living and practicing
together at the Deer Park in Isipatana, near the city of Varanasi. Gautama, if you
will excuse me, I will continue on my way. I have a long day’s journey ahead.”
   The Buddha joined his palms to bid Upaka farewell, and then he turned to the
children. “Children, I will follow the road to Varanasi to find my five friends.
The sun has risen. Please return home now.”
   The Buddha joined his palms in farewell. Then he followed the river
northwards. He knew it would be a longer route but easier to travel. The


Neranjara River led northwards to where it emptied into the Ganga. If he
followed the westward course of the Ganga, he would reach the village of
Pataligrama within a few days. There he could cross to the other side of the
Ganga and reach Varanasi, the capital of Kasi.
   The children gazed at him until he was out of sight. They were filled with
terrible sadness and longing. Sujata cried, and Svasti felt like crying too, but he
did not want to cry in front of his brother and sisters. After a long moment, he
said, “Sister Sujata, I need to get ready to tend the buffaloes. We should all head
home. Bala, remember to give Rupak a bath today. Here, I’ll carry Bhima.”
   They followed the riverbank back towards the village. No one spoke another
word.
The elder Ananda was gentle and friendly, as well as unusually handsome. And
he did indeed possess an uncanny memory. He remembered every detail of every
discourse the Buddha gave. He repeated the eleven points the Buddha had
elaborated in the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes, to Svasti and Rahula’s
gratitude. Svasti realized that Ananda would remember everything Svasti had
just recounted about the Buddha’s time in the forest near Uruvela.
   While Svasti recounted his story, he glanced often at Bhikkhuni Gotami. Her
sparkling eyes told him how much she enjoyed listening to all he was saying. He
made a special effort to include as many details as he could remember.
Bhikkhuni Gotami especially enjoyed hearing about all the children in Uruvela,
like the time they ate tangerines mindfully with the Buddha in the forest.
   It was easy to see how much Rahula enjoyed hearing what Svasti had to say.
Although the elder Assaji had not made any comments during the two days
Svasti told his story, it was clear he was enjoying it also. Svasti knew that Assaji
was one of the five friends who had practiced self-mortification with the
Buddha. Svasti was most curious to know what happened when the Buddha met
them after six months of separation, but he was too shy to ask. As if she could
read his thoughts, Bhikkhuni Gotami said, “Svasti, would you like to hear the
elder Assaji tell us what happened after the Buddha left Uruvela? Assaji has
been with the Buddha for ten years now, but I don’t think he has ever spoken
about what happened in the Deer Park at Isipatana. Master Assaji, would you


consent to tell us about the Buddha’s first Dharma talk and some of what has
taken place in the past ten years?”
   Assaji joined his palms and responded, “No need to call me Master,
Bhikkhuni Gotami. Today we have already heard a great deal from Bhikkhu
Svasti, and it is almost time for meditation. Why don’t you all come to my hut
tomorrow, and I will tell you all that I remember.”
Kondanna took Siddhartha’s begging bowl, Mahanama brought him water,
Bhaddiya pulled up a stool, Vappa fanned him with a palm leaf, while Assaji
stood to one side, not knowing what to do.


                           Chapter Twenty-Two
                       Turning the Wheel of Dharma
Assaji was practicing the austere way in the Deer Park. One day after his sitting
meditation, he noticed a monk approaching from off in the distance. As the
stranger came closer, he realized it was none other than Siddhartha, and he
quickly told his four friends.
   Bhaddiya said, “Siddhartha abandoned the path half-way. He ate rice, drank
milk, and visited with the village children. He really let us down. I say we
shouldn’t even greet him.” So the five friends agreed not to meet Siddhartha by
the gate to the park. They also decided not to stand and greet him if he should
enter the Deer Park by himself. But what actually took place was entirely
different.
   When Siddhartha entered the gate, the five ascetic companions were so
impressed by his radiant bearing that they all stood up at once. Siddhartha
seemed to be surrounded by an aura of light. Each step he took revealed a rare
spiritual strength. His penetrating gaze undermined their intention to snub him.
Kondanna ran up to him and took his begging bowl. Mahanama fetched water so
that Siddhartha could wash his hands and feet. Bhaddiya pulled up a stool for
him to sit on. Vappa found a fan of palm leaves and began to fan him. Assaji
stood to one side, not knowing what to do.
   After Siddhartha washed his hands and feet, Assaji realized he could fill a
bowl with cool water and offer it to him. The five friends sat in a circle around
Siddhartha, who looked kindly at them and said, “My brothers, I have found the
Way, and I will show it to you.”
   Assaji half-believed and half-doubted Siddhartha’s words. Perhaps the others
felt the same, for no one spoke for a long moment. Then Kondanna blurted out,
“Gautama! You abandoned the path halfway. You ate rice, drank milk, and spent
time with the village children. How can you have found the path to liberation?”
   Siddhartha looked into Kondanna’s eyes and asked, “Friend Kondanna, you
have known me a long time. During all that time, have I ever lied to you?”
   Kondanna admitted that he had not. “Indeed, Siddhartha, I have never heard
you speak anything but the truth.”


   The Buddha said, “Then please listen, my friends. I have found the Great Way,
and I will show it to you. You will be the first to hear my Teaching. This Dharma
is not the result of thinking. It is the fruit of direct experience. Listen serenely
with all your awareness.”
   The Buddha’s voice was filled with such spiritual authority that his five
friends joined their palms and looked up at him. Kondanna spoke for them all,
“Please, friend Gautama, show us compassion and teach us the Way.”
   The Buddha began serenely, “My brothers, there are two extremes that a
person on the path should avoid. One is to plunge oneself into sensual pleasures,
and the other is to practice austerities which deprive the body of its needs. Both
of these extremes lead to failure. The path I have discovered is the Middle Way,
which avoids both extremes and has the capacity to lead one to understanding,
liberation, and peace. It is the Noble Eightfold Path of right understanding, right
thought, right speech, right action, right livelihood, right effort, right
mindfulness, and right concentration. I have followed this Noble Eightfold Path
and have realized understanding, liberation, and peace.
   “Brothers, why do I call this path the Right Path? I call it the Right Path
because it does not avoid or deny suffering, but allows for a direct confrontation
with suffering as the means to overcome it. The Noble Eightfold Path is the path
of living in awareness. Mindfulness is the foundation. By practicing
mindfulness, you can develop concentration which enables you to attain
Understanding. Thanks to right concentration, you realize right awareness,
thoughts, speech, action, livelihood, and effort. The Understanding which
develops can liberate you from every shackle of suffering and give birth to true
peace and joy.
   “Brothers, there are four truths: the existence of suffering, the cause of
suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path which leads to the cessation of
suffering. I call these the Four Noble Truths. The first is the existence of
suffering. Birth, old age, sickness, and death are suffering. Sadness, anger,
jealousy, worry, anxiety, fear, and despair are suffering. Separation from loved
ones is suffering. Association with those you hate is suffering. Desire,
attachment, and clinging to the five aggregates are suffering.
   “Brothers, the second truth is the cause of suffering. Because of ignorance,
people cannot see the truth about life, and they become caught in the flames of
desire, anger, jealousy, grief, worry, fear, and despair.
   “Brothers, the third truth is the cessation of suffering. Understanding the truth
of life brings about the cessation of every grief and sorrow and gives rise to


peace and joy.
   “Brothers, the fourth truth is the path which leads to the cessation of suffering.
It is the Noble Eightfold Path, which I have just explained. The Noble Eightfold
Path is nourished by living mindfully. Mindfulness leads to concentration and
understanding which liberates you from every pain and sorrow and leads to
peace and joy. I will guide you along this path of realization.”
   While Siddhartha was explaining the Four Noble Truths, Kondanna suddenly
felt a great light shining within his own heart. He could taste the liberation he
had sought for so long. His face beamed with joy. The Buddha pointed at him
and cried, “Kondanna! You’ve got it! You’ve got it!”
   Kondanna joined his palms and bowed before the Buddha. With deepest
respect, he spoke, “Venerable Gautama, please accept me as your disciple. I
know that under your guidance, I will attain the Great Awakening.”
   The other four monks also bowed at the Buddha’s feet, joined their palms, and
asked to be received as disciples. The Buddha motioned his friends to rise. After
they took their places again, he said, “Brothers! The children of Uruvela village
gave me the name ‘the Buddha.’ You, too, may call me by that name if you like.”
   Kondanna asked, “Doesn’t ‘Buddha’ mean ‘one who is awakened’?”
   “That is correct. And they call the path I have discovered ‘the Way of
Awakening.’ What do you think of this name?”
   “‘One who is awakened’! ‘The Way of Awakening’! Wonderful! Wonderful!
These names are true, yet simple. We will happily call you the Buddha and the
path you have discovered the Way of Awakening. As you just said, living each
day mindfully is the very basis of spiritual practice.” The five monks were of
one mind to accept Gautama as their teacher and to call him the Buddha.
   The Buddha smiled at them. “Please, brothers, practice with an open and
intelligent spirit, and in three months you will have attained the fruit of
liberation.”
   The Buddha stayed in Isipatana to guide his five friends. Following his
teaching, they gave up their practice of austerities. Every day three monks went
begging for food and returned to share the offerings with the other three. The
Buddha gave them individual attention, enabling each monk to make rapid
progress.
   The Buddha taught them about the impermanent and non-self nature of all
things. He taught them to look at the five aggregates as five constantly flowing
rivers which contained nothing that could be called separate or permanent. The
five aggregates were the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and


consciousness. By meditating on the five aggregates within themselves, they
came to see the intimate and wondrous connection between themselves and all in
the universe.
   Thanks to their diligence, they all realized the Way. The first to attain
Awakening was Kondanna, followed two months later by Vappa and Bhaddiya.
Shortly afterwards, Mahanama and Assaji also attained Arhatship.
   In great joy, the Buddha told them, “Now we have a real community, which
we will call our Sangha. The sangha is the community of those who live in
harmony and awareness. We must take the seeds of awakening and sow them in
all places.”
It was the Buddha’s custom to walk in meditation each morning among the forest
trees.




                          Chapter Twenty-Three
                                 Dharma Nectar
It was the Buddha’s custom to rise early and to sit in meditation, and then do
walking meditation among the forest trees. One morning while walking, he saw
a handsome, elegantly dressed man in his late twenties, half-hidden in the
morning mist. The Buddha sat on a large rock, and when the man approached
quite close to the rock, still unaware of the Buddha, he mumbled, “Disgusting!
Repulsive!”
   The Buddha spoke up, “There is nothing disgusting. There is nothing
repulsive.”
   The man stopped in his tracks. The Buddha’s voice was clear and soothing,
and the man looked up to see the Buddha sitting there, relaxed and serene. The
young man removed his sandals and bowed deeply before the Buddha. Then he
sat on a nearby rock.
   The Buddha asked, “What is so disgusting? What is so repulsive?”
   The young man introduced himself as Yasa, the son of one of the wealthiest
and most reputable merchants in Varanasi. Yasa had always enjoyed a life of
splendor and ease. His parents catered to his every whim, providing him with
every kind of pleasure, including a handsome manor, jewels, money, wine,
courtesans, banquets, and parties. But Yasa, a sensitive and thoughtful young
man, had begun to feel suffocated by this life of pleasure and could no longer
find any contentment in it.
   He was like a person locked in a room without windows; he longed for some
fresh air, for a simple, wholesome life. The night before, Yasa and some friends
had gathered to feast, drink, play music, and be entertained by lovely young
courtesans. In the middle of the night, Yasa woke up and looked at his friends
and the young women sprawled out asleep. At that moment he knew he could
not continue to live that way. He threw a cloak over his body, slipped on a pair of
sandals, and walked out the front gate, not even knowing where he would go. He
had wandered aimlessly all night until by chance he found himself in the Deer
Park of Isipatana. And now as the sun rose, he sat facing the Buddha.
   The Buddha counselled him, “Yasa, this life is filled with suffering, but it is


also filled with many wonders. To drown in sensual pleasures is bad for the
health of both body and mind. If you live simply and wholesomely, not ruled by
desires, it is possible to experience the many wonders of life. Yasa, look around
you. Can you see the trees standing in the morning mists? Are they not
beautiful? The moon, the stars, the rivers, the mountains, the sunlight, the songs
of birds, and the sounds of bubbling springs are all manifestations of a universe
which can provide us with endless happiness.
   “The happiness we receive from these things nourishes mind and body. Close
your eyes, and breathe in and out a few times. Now open them. What do you
see? Trees, mist, sky, rays of sunlight. Your own two eyes are wonders. Because
you have been out of touch with wonders like these, you have come to despise
your mind and body. Some people despise their own minds and bodies so much
they want to commit suicide. They see only the suffering in life. But suffering is
not the true nature of the universe. Suffering is the result of the way we live and
of our erroneous understanding of life.”
   The Buddha’s words touched Yasa like fresh drops of cool dew to soothe his
parched heart. Overcome with happiness, he prostrated before the Buddha and
asked to become a disciple.
   The Buddha helped him up and said, “A monk lives a simple and humble life.
He has no money. He sleeps in a grass hut or beneath the trees. He eats only
what he receives from begging, and he eats only one meal a day. Can you live
such a life?”
   “Yes, Master, I would be happy to live such a life.”
   The Buddha continued, “A monk devotes his mind and body to realize
liberation, in order to help himself and all others. He concentrates his efforts to
help relieve suffering. Do you vow to follow such a path?”
   “Yes, Master, I vow to follow such a path.”
   “Then I accept you as my disciple. A disciple in my community is known as a
bhikkhu, a beggar. Every day you will go to beg your food in order to nourish
yourself, to practice humility, and to be in touch with others in order to show
them the Way.”
   Just then the Buddha’s five friends and first disciples appeared. Yasa stood up
and respectfully greeted each one. The Buddha introduced them to Yasa and then
turned to Kondanna, “Kondanna, Yasa wishes to become a bhikkhu. I have
accepted him. Please show him how to wear a robe, carry a begging bowl,
observe his breath, and do sitting and walking meditation.”
   Yasa bowed to the Buddha and then followed Kondanna, who led him to his


hut, where he shaved Yasa’s hair and gave him instruction according to the
Buddha’s wishes. Kondanna happened to have an extra robe and bowl which had
been offered to him but which he had never used. He gave these to Yasa.
   That afternoon Yasa’s father came looking for him. All morning long the
household had frantically been seeking Yasa at his father’s orders. One servant
followed Yasa’s footprints to the Deer Park, and there he found Yasa’s golden
sandals abandoned by a large rock. After making inquiries, he learned that his
young master was staying there with some monks. He returned in haste to inform
Yasa’s father.
   When Yasa’s father arrived, he found the Buddha sitting serenely on a rock.
He joined his palms and respectfully asked, “Revered monk, have you seen my
son Yasa?”
   The Buddha motioned to a nearby rock and invited Yasa’s father to be seated.
He said, “Yasa is in the hut and will be out shortly.”
   Yasa’s father listened as the Buddha recounted all that had taken place that
morning. The Buddha helped him understand Yasa’s inner thoughts and
aspirations. “Yasa is a bright and sensitive young man. He has found the path of
liberation for his heart. He now has faith, peace, and joy. Please be happy for
him,” the Buddha said.
   The Buddha also told Yasa’s father how it was possible to live in a way that
could reduce suffering and anxiety and create peace and joy for oneself and all
those around one. The merchant felt lighter with each word the Buddha spoke.
He stood up and joined his palms together to ask to be accepted as a lay disciple.
   The Buddha was silent for a moment and then he spoke, “My disciples strive
to live simply with awareness, avoid killing, shun adultery, speak truthfully, and
avoid alcohol and stimulants which cloud the mind. Sir, if you feel you can
follow such a path I will accept you as a lay disciple.”
   Yasa’s father knelt before the Buddha and joined his palms. “Allow me to take
refuge in your teaching. Please show me the way in this life. I vow to remain
faithful to your teaching all my days.”
   The Buddha helped the merchant back to his feet. Yasa joined them. He was
clad in a bhikkhu’s robe and his head was shaven. The new bhikkhu smiled with
rare joy. He joined his palms to make a lotus bud and then bowed to his father.
Yasa looked radiant. His father had never seen him so happy. Yasa’s father
bowed to his son and said, “Your mother is at home, and she is very worried
about you.”
   Yasa answered, “I will visit her to relieve her worries. But I have taken vows


to follow the Buddha and to live a life of service to all beings.”
   Yasa’s father turned to the Buddha, “Please, Master, allow me to invite you
and your bhikkhus to have a meal at my house tomorrow. We would be deeply
honored if you would come instruct us on the Path of Awakening.”
   The Buddha turned and looked at Yasa. The new bhikkhu’s eyes sparkled.
Then the Buddha nodded his acceptance.
   The following day, the Buddha and his six bhikkhus ate at the home of Yasa’s
parents. Yasa’s mother wept, so overcome was she to see her son both safe and
happy. The Buddha and his bhikkhus were invited to sit on cushioned chairs.
Yasa’s mother served them herself. As the bhikkhus ate in silence, no one spoke,
not even the household servants. When the meal was finished and the begging
bowls had been washed, Yasa’s parents bowed to the Buddha and then sat on low
stools placed before him. The Buddha taught them the five precepts which
formed the foundation of practice for lay disciples.
   “The first precept is do not kill. All living beings fear death. If we truly follow
the path of understanding and love, we will observe this precept. Not only
should we protect the lives of humans, we should protect the lives of animals as
well. Observing this precept nourishes compassion and wisdom.
   “The second precept is do not steal. We do not have the right to steal the
property of others, nor to gain wealth by taking advantage of the labor of others.
We must find ways to help others support themselves.
   “The third precept is do not engage in sexual misconduct. Do not violate the
rights and commitments of others. Always remain faithful to your spouse.
   “The fourth precept is do not say untruthful things. Do not utter words that
distort the truth or cause discord and hatred. Do not spread news that you do not
know to be certain.
   “The fifth precept is do not use alcohol or any other stimulants.
   “If you live by the spirit of the five precepts, you will avoid suffering and
discord for yourself, your family, and your friends. You will find your happiness
in life multiplied many times over.”
   As Yasa’s mother listened to the Buddha, she felt as though a gate of
happiness had just opened in her heart. She was happy to know that her husband
had already been accepted as a lay disciple by the Buddha. She knelt before the
Buddha and joined her palms. She, too, was accepted as a lay disciple.
   The Buddha and his six bhikkhus returned to Isipatana.


                          Chapter Twenty-Four
                                 Taking Refuge
News of Yasa becoming a bhikkhu spread quickly among his friends. His closest
companions—Vimala, Subahu, Punnaji, and Gavampati—decided to visit him at
Isipatana. On the way there Subahu said, “If Yasa has decided to become a
monk, his Master must really be extraordinary and the path he teaches most
lofty. Yasa is very discriminating.”
   Vimala retorted, “Don’t be so certain. Perhaps he became a monk on a whim,
and it won’t last long. After six months or a year, he may very well abandon
such a life.”
   Gavampati disagreed. “You’re not taking Yasa seriously enough. I have
always found him to be quite serious, and I’m sure he wouldn’t do anything like
this without sincerely intending it.”
   When they found Yasa at the Deer Park, he introduced them to the Buddha.
“Teacher, these four friends of mine are all fine persons. Please have compassion
and open their eyes to the path of liberation.”
   The Buddha sat down to talk with the four young men. At first Vimala was the
most skeptical, but the more he heard the more impressed he became. Finally, he
suggested to the other three that they all ask the Buddha to accept them as
bhikkhus. The four young men knelt before the Buddha. Recognizing their
sincerity, the Buddha accepted them on the spot. He asked Kondanna to give
them basic instruction.
   Yasa had several hundred other friends who soon heard how Yasa and his four
closest companions had all become bhikkhus. One hundred twenty of these
young men, all in their twenties, met outside Yasa’s home and decided to visit
Isipatana that very morning. Yasa was informed of their arrival and he came out
to greet them. He spoke about his decision to become a bhikkhu and then he led
them to have an audience with the Buddha.
   Surrounded by the young men, the Buddha spoke about the path which can
end suffering and lead to peace and joy. He told them about his own search and
how he had vowed to find the Way while he was still a young man. The one
hundred twenty young men listened as if entranced. Fifty of them requested to


become bhikkhus at once. Many of the other seventy also wanted to become
bhikkhus but could not abandon their responsibilities as sons, husbands, and
fathers.
   Yasa asked the Buddha to accept his fifty friends, and the Buddha agreed.
Overjoyed, Yasa said, “With your permission, tomorrow I will pass by my
parents’ home when I am out begging. I can ask them if they might like to offer
robes and bowls to these new bhikkhus.”
   The Buddha now had sixty bhikkhus living with him at the Deer Park. He
remained there for three additional months in order to guide the community.
During that time, several hundred men and women were accepted by the Buddha
as lay disciples.
   The Buddha taught the bhikkhus how to practice observing their body,
feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness. He taught them
about the interdependent nature of all things and explained that meditating on
interdependence was very important. He explained that all things depend on each
other for their arising, development, and decline. Without dependent co-arising,
nothing could exist. Within one thing existed all things. “The meditation on
dependent co-arising,” he said, “is a gate which leads to liberation from birth and
death. It has the power to break through fixed and narrow views such as the
belief that the universe has been created either by some god or from some
element such as earth, water, fire, or air.”
   The Buddha understood his responsibility as a teacher. He cared for and
guided the sixty bhikkhus like a loving elder brother. He also shared a lot of
responsibility with his first five disciples. Kondanna guided twenty young men,
while Bhaddiya, Vappa, Mahanama, and Assaji each helped guide ten young
men. All the bhikkhus made great progress along the path.
   When the Buddha saw this, he called the community together and said,
“Bhikkhus, please listen. We are totally free, not bound by anything. You
understand the path now. Proceed with confidence and you will make great
strides. You can leave Isipatana whenever you like. Walk as free persons and
share the Way of Awakening with others. Please sow the seeds of liberation and
enlightenment to bring peace and joy to others. Teach the path of liberation
which is beautiful from beginning to end, in form and content. Countless others
will benefit from your work of spreading the Dharma. As for me, I will leave
soon. I plan to head east. I want to visit the bodhi tree and the children in
Uruvela village. Afterwards I will go to visit a special friend in Rajagaha.”
   After listening to the Buddha’s words, a large number of bhikkhus, clad in


brick-colored robes and carrying just their begging bowls, left to go spread the
teaching. Only twenty bhikkhus remained in Isipatana.
   Before long, many people in the kingdoms of Kasi and Magadha heard about
the Buddha and his disciples. They knew that a prince of the Sakya clan had
attained liberation and was teaching his path in Isipatana, near the city of
Varanasi. Many monks, who up to then had not yet attained the fruits of
liberation, felt greatly encouraged, and they came from all directions to
Isipatana. After hearing the Buddha speak, most took vows to become bhikkhus.
The bhikkhus who had left Isipatana to spread the teaching brought back many
more young men who also wished to become monks. The number of disciples
soon swelled.
   One day the Buddha gathered the sangha in the Deer Park and said,
“Bhikkhus! It is no longer necessary for me personally to ordain every new
bhikkhu or for everyone who wishes to be ordained to come to Isipatana. Those
who wish to receive ordination should be able to do so in their own villages, in
the presence of their friends and families. And, like you, I too would like to be
free to remain here and to travel from here. Henceforth, when you meet a sincere
and aspiring new bhikkhu, you may ordain him wherever you may be.”
   Kondanna stood up and joined his palms. “Master, please show us the way to
organize a ceremony of ordination. Then we can do it by ourselves in the
future.”
   The Buddha answered, “Please do as I have done in the past.”
   Assaji stood up and said, “Master, your presence is so formidable, you do not
need to perform a formal ceremony. But for the rest of us, a formal procedure is
needed. Brother Kondanna, perhaps you can suggest a form. The Buddha is here
with us and he can add to your suggestions.”
   Kondanna was silent for a moment. Then he spoke, “Respected Buddha, I
think the first step should be to have the aspiring bhikkhu allow his hair and
beard to be shaved. Then he can be instructed in the manner of wearing the robe.
After he has put on his robe, he can expose his right shoulder in the customary
manner, and kneel before the monk giving the ordination. It is proper to kneel as
the monk giving the ordination is serving as the representative of the Buddha.
The one being ordained can hold his palms together like a lotus bud and recite
three times, ‘I take refuge in the Buddha, the one who shows me the way in this
life. I take refuge in the Dharma, the way of understanding and love. I take
refuge in the Sangha, the community that lives in harmony and awareness.’ After
repeating these refuges, he will be considered a bhikkhu in the community of the


Buddha. But this is only my poor suggestion. Please, Teacher, correct it.”
   The Buddha answered, “It is most fine, Brother Kondanna. Reciting the three
refuges three times while kneeling before an already ordained bhikkhu shall be
sufficient to become an ordained bhikkhu.”
   The community was happy with this decision.
   A few days later the Buddha put on his robe, lifted his bowl, and left Isipatana
on his own. It was an especially beautiful morning. He headed towards the
Ganga River to return to Magadha.


                          Chapter Twenty-Five
                              Music’s Lofty Peaks
The Buddha had traveled the road from Varanasi to Rajagaha before. He walked
slowly and enjoyed the surrounding forests and rice fields. Towards noon, he
stopped to beg in a small hamlet by the roadside. He then entered the forest to
eat quietly, and then did walking meditation right there. When he was finished,
he sat beneath a shady tree to meditate. He enjoyed being alone in the forest.
After he had meditated for some hours, a group of well-dressed young men
passed by, obviously agitated over something. Several of them clutched musical
instruments. The young man at the head of their party bowed his head to greet
the Buddha and then asked, “Monk, did you see a girl run by here?”
   The Buddha asked, “Why do you wish to find her?”
   The young man recounted their story from the beginning. They were from the
city of Varanasi and had entered the forest that morning on a pleasure outing,
bringing with them their musical instruments and a young woman to entertain
them. When they had finished singing, dancing, and feasting, they stretched out
on the forest floor to take a nap. But when they awoke, they discovered that the
young girl had stolen their jewelry and disappeared. They had been chasing after
her ever since.
   The Buddha looked calmly at the young men and asked, “Tell me, friends, is it
better in this moment to find the young woman or to find your own selves?”
   The young men were startled. The Buddha’s radiant appearance and his
unusual question brought them back to themselves. The first young man
answered, “Respected Teacher, perhaps we should try to find ourselves first.”
   The Buddha said, “Life can be found only in the present moment, but our
minds rarely dwell in the present moment. Instead we chase after the past or long
for the future. We think we are being ourselves, but in fact we almost never are
in real contact with ourselves. Our minds are too busy chasing after yesterday’s
memories or tomorrow’s dreams. The only way to be in touch with life is to
return to the present moment. Once you know how to return to the present
moment, you will become awakened, and at that moment, you will find your true
self.


   “Look at these tender leaves caressed by the sunlight. Have you ever really
looked at the green of the leaves with a serene and awakened heart? This shade
of green is one of the wonders of life. If you have never really looked at it,
please do so now.”
   The young men grew very quiet. With their eyes following the Buddha’s
pointing finger, each of them looked at the green leaves gently swaying in the
afternoon breeze. A moment later, the Buddha turned to the youth sitting on his
right and said, “I see you have a flute. Please play something for us.”
   The youth felt shy, but he lifted his flute to his lips and began to play.
Everyone listened attentively. The flute’s sound was like the lamenting cry of a
disappointed lover. The Buddha’s eyes did not waver from the young man
playing the flute. When he finished his song, sadness seemed to veil the
afternoon forest. Still no one spoke, until suddenly the young man held out his
flute to the Buddha and said, “Respected Monk, please play for us.”
   The Buddha smiled, as several of the young men burst out laughing, taking
their friend for a real fool. Who ever heard of a monk playing the flute? But to
their surprise, the Buddha took the flute in his hands. The young men all turned
their eyes to the Buddha, unable to mask their curiosity. The Buddha took
several deep breaths, and then raised the flute to his lips.
   The image of a young man playing the flute long ago in the royal gardens of
Kapilavatthu arose in the Buddha’s mind. It was a full moon night. He could see
Mahapajapati sitting on a stone bench quietly listening. And there was
Yasodhara with her freshly lit incense holder of fragrant sandalwood. The
Buddha began to play the flute.
   The sound was as delicate as a thin strand of smoke curling gently from the
roof of a simple dwelling outside Kapilavatthu at the hour of the evening meal.
Slowly the thin strand expanded across space like a gathering of clouds which in
turn transformed into a thousand-petalled lotus, each petal a different
shimmering color. It seemed that one flutist suddenly had become ten thousand
flutists, and all the wonders of the universe had been transformed into sounds—
sounds of a thousand colors and forms, sounds as light as a breeze and quick as
the pattering of rain, clear as a crane flying overhead, intimate as a lullaby, bright
as a shining jewel, and subtle as the smile of one who has transcended all
thoughts of gain and loss. The birds of the forest stopped singing in order to
listen to this sublime music, and even the breezes ceased rustling the leaves. The
forest was enveloped in an atmosphere of total peace, serenity, and wonder. The
young men sitting around the Buddha felt completely refreshed, and they now


dwelled completely in the present moment, in touch with all the wonders of the
trees, the Buddha, the flute, and each other’s friendship. Even after the Buddha
put the flute down, they could still hear the music. Not one of the young men
thought about the young woman or the jewels she had stolen.
   No one spoke for a long while. Then the young man to whom the flute
belonged asked the Buddha, “Master, you play so wonderfully! I’ve never heard
anyone who could play so well. Who did you study with? Would you accept me
as your student so that I could learn flute from you?”
   The Buddha smiled and he said, “I learned to play the flute when I was a boy,
but I have not played in nearly seven years. My sound, however, is better than it
was before.”
   “How can that be, Master? How can your playing have improved if you have
not practiced in seven years?”
   “Playing the flute does not depend solely on practicing the flute. I now play
better than in the past because I have found my true self. You cannot reach lofty
heights in art if you do not first discover the unsurpassable beauty in your own
heart. If you would like to play the flute truly well, you must find your true self
on the Path of Awakening.”
   The Buddha explained the path of liberation, the Four Noble Truths, and the
Noble Eightfold Path. The young men listened intently, and when the Buddha
was finished speaking, every one of them knelt down and asked to be accepted
as a disciple. The Buddha ordained them all. He then instructed them to make
their way to Isipatana and introduce themselves to the bhikkhu Kondanna who
would give them guidance in the practice of the Way. The Buddha told them he
would see them again before long.
   That night the Buddha slept alone in the forest. The next morning he crossed
the Ganga and headed east. He wanted to visit the children of Uruvela before
making his way to Rajagaha to see King Bimbisara.


                           Chapter Twenty-Six
                               Water Rises, Too
Seven days later, the Buddha was happy to find himself back in the forest of the
bodhi tree. He rested the night there. In the morning he surprised Svasti by the
banks of the Neranjara River. They sat for a long while along the shore before
the Buddha told Svasti he should continue cutting the kusa grass needed by the
buffaloes. He also helped Svasti cut some grass. Then, bidding Svasti good-bye,
he walked to the village to beg.
   The next afternoon the village children came to visit the Buddha in the forest.
All of Svasti’s family was there. Sujata brought along all her friends. The
children were very happy to see the Buddha again. They listened intently while
he told them all that had happened to him in the past year. The Buddha promised
Svasti that when Svasti was twenty years old, the Buddha would accept him as a
bhikkhu. By that time, Svasti’s sisters and brother would be old enough to care
for themselves.
   The children told the Buddha that over the past few months a spiritual
community led by a brahman had settled nearby. There were five hundred
devotees in all. They did not shave their heads like the bhikkhus. Instead their
hair was braided and then piled on top of their heads. They worshipped the god
of Fire. The brahman’s name was Kassapa. He was deeply revered by all who
met him.
   The following morning, the Buddha crossed the river and found Master
Kassapa’s community. His devotees lived in simple huts made from leafy
branches and wore clothes made from the bark of trees. They did not enter the
village to beg but accepted offerings brought to them by the villagers. In
addition, they raised their own animals for food and for making sacrifices. The
Buddha stopped to speak with one of Kassapa’s followers who told him that
Kassapa was deeply versed in the Vedas and lived a life of utmost virtue.
Kassapa, he explained, also had two younger brothers who also led communities
of fire worship. All three brothers held fire to be the original essence of the
universe. Uruvela Kassapa was deeply loved by his two brothers, Nadi Kassapa
who lived with three hundred devotees along the Neranjara about a day’s travel


north, and Gaya Kassapa who led two hundred devotees in Gaya.
   Kassapa’s disciple led the Buddha to his master’s hut so that the Buddha could
have an audience with him. Although Kassapa was no longer a young man, he
was still quick and alert. When he saw the young teacher’s extraordinary
bearing, he felt immediately drawn to him and treated him as a special guest.
Kassapa invited the Buddha to sit on a stump outside the hut, and the two
enjoyed a long conversation. Kassapa marvelled at how deeply versed the
Buddha was in the Vedas. He was further astounded to discover that this young
monk had grasped certain concepts in the Vedas which had eluded his own
understanding. The Buddha helped explain certain of the most profound
passages in the Atharveda and Rigveda scriptures which Kassapa thought he had
understood but discovered he had not yet truly grasped. Even more amazing was
the young monk’s knowledge of history, doctrine, and brahmanic rituals.
   That noon the Buddha accepted Uruvela Kassapa’s invitation to have a meal
with him. The Buddha neatly folded his outer robe into a cushion and sat upon it,
eating in mindful silence. So impressed was Uruvela Kassapa by the Buddha’s
serene and majestic countenance that he did not break the silence.
   That afternoon they continued their conversation. The Buddha asked, “Master
Kassapa, can you explain to me how worshipping fire can lead a person to
liberation?”
   Uruvela Kassapa did not answer right away. He knew very well that a
superficial or ordinary response would not suffice for this extraordinary young
monk. Kassapa began by explaining that fire was the basic essence of the
universe. It had its source in Brahma. The main altar of the community, the Fire
Sanctuary, always kept a sacred fire burning. That fire was itself the image of
Brahma. The Atharveda scripture spoke of fire worship. Fire was life. Without
fire there could be no life. Fire was light, warmth, and the source of the sun
which enabled plants, animals, and people to live. It chased away dark shadows,
conquered the cold, and brought joy and vitality to all beings. Food was made
edible by fire, and thanks to fire, people were reunited with Brahma at death.
Because fire was the source of life it was Brahma himself. Agni, the god of fire,
was one of the thousands of manifestations of Brahma. On the Fire Altar, Agni
was portrayed as having two heads. One symbolized the daily uses of fire and
the other symbolized the fire of sacrifice and returning to the source of life. The
fire worshippers performed forty sacrificial rites. A devotee in their community
had to observe precepts, practice austerities, and pray diligently in order to
follow the path that would one day lead to liberation.


   Kassapa was strongly opposed to those brahmans who used their position in
society to acquire wealth and lose themselves in pursuit of sensual pleasures. He
said that such brahmans only performed rituals and recited the scriptures in order
to become rich. Because of that the reputation of the traditional brahmanic path
had become tarnished.
   The Buddha asked, “Master Kassapa, what do you think of those who regard
water as the fundamental essence of life, who say that water is the element
which purifies and returns people to union with Brahma?”
   Kassapa hesitated. He thought of the hundreds of thousands of people, right at
that very moment, who were bathing themselves in the waters of Ganga and
other sacred rivers to purify themselves.
   “Gautama, water cannot really help one attain liberation. Water naturally
flows down. Only fire rises. When we die, our body rises in smoke thanks to
fire.”
   “Master Kassapa, that is not accurate. The white clouds floating above are
also a form of water. Thus, water rises too. Indeed, smoke itself is no more than
evaporated water. Both clouds and smoke will eventually return to a liquid state.
All things, as I’m sure you know, move in cycles.”
   “But all things share one fundamental essence and all things return to that one
essence.”
   “Master Kassapa, all things depend on all other things for their existence.
Take, for example, this leaf in my hand. Earth, water, heat, seed, tree, clouds,
sun, time, space—all these elements have enabled this leaf to come into
existence. If just one of these elements was missing, the leaf could not exist. All
beings, organic and inorganic, rely on the law of dependent co-arising. The
source of one thing is all things. Please consider this carefully. Don’t you see
that this leaf I am now holding in my hand is only here thanks to the
interpenetration of all the phenomena in the universe, including your own
awareness?”
   It was already evening and beginning to grow dark. Kassapa invited the
Buddha to sleep in his own hut. It was the first time he had ever made such an
offer to anyone, but then he had never before met such an extraordinary monk.
But the Buddha refused, saying that he had grown accustomed to sleeping alone
at night. He said he would like to sleep in the Fire Sanctuary if that would be all
right.
   The brahman said, “For the past several days, an enormous snake has taken
refuge in the Fire Sanctuary. All efforts to chase it away have failed. You must


not sleep there, friend Gautama. It might be dangerous. We have even been
holding our ceremonies outside for fear of the snake. Please sleep in my hut for
your own safety.”
   The Buddha replied, “Don’t worry. I want to sleep in the Fire Sanctuary. I will
not be in any danger.”
   The Buddha recalled all the months he had practiced austerities in the wild
jungles. Wild beasts passed him by without harming him. Sometimes while he
sat in meditation enormous snakes slithered in front of him. He knew that if you
took care not to frighten such animals, they would not harm you.
   Seeing that the Buddha could not be dissuaded, Kassapa said, “If you wish to
sleep in the Fire Sanctuary, you shall. You may sleep there as many nights as you
like.”
   That night the Buddha entered the Fire Sanctuary. On the central altar burned
a great fire fed by many candles. On one side of the room was a pile of
sandalwood logs, which were used for outdoor ceremonies. The Buddha guessed
that the snake was probably curled up in the wood pile, so he sat in meditation
on the other side of the room, using his folded robe as a cushion. He meditated
deep into the night. Towards the end of his meditation, he saw the great snake
coiled in the center of the room looking at him. The Buddha spoke softly to it,
“Dear friend, return to the jungle for your own safety.”
   The Buddha’s voice was filled with love and understanding. The snake slowly
uncoiled itself and crept out the door. The Buddha stretched out and fell asleep.
   When he awoke, brilliant moonlight poured through the window onto his
sleeping place. The eighteenth day moon was unusually bright. He thought how
pleasant it would be to do walking meditation beneath its light. He shook off the
dust from his outer robe and put it on before walking out of the Fire Sanctuary.
   In the early hours of the morning, the Sanctuary somehow caught on fire.
Those who saw it first shouted to all the others. Everyone filled buckets with
water at the river’s edge, but to no avail. The water came too late to extinguish
the raging fire. At last, the five hundred devotees could do no more than stand
and watch their Sanctuary burn to the ground.
   Uruvela Kassapa stood with his followers. His heart was heavy with grief as
he thought of the virtuous and talented young monk he had met only the day
before. The young monk had surely perished in the fire. If only Gautama had
consented to sleep in his hut, he would still be alive. Just as he was thinking this,
the Buddha appeared. The Buddha had seen the fire from where he had been
walking in the hills and he had returned to see if he could be of any assistance.


   Overcome with relief and joy, Kassapa ran to the Buddha and grasped his
hand. “Thank goodness, you are alive, friend Gautama! Nothing has happened to
you! I am so happy!”
   The Buddha placed his hands on the brahman’s shoulders and smiled. “Thank
you, my friend. Yes, I am all right.”
   The Buddha knew that on that day Uruvela Kassapa would give a discourse
and that in addition to his own five hundred disciples, at least a thousand others
would attend from the neighboring villages. The lecture would take place after
the noon meal. Sensing that his presence during the lecture might cause Kassapa
some discomfort, the Buddha went begging down in the village. After receiving
food offerings he walked to the lotus pond, ate his meal there, and spent the
entire afternoon at that pleasant place.
   Late in the afternoon, Kassapa came looking for him. When he found him by
the pond, he said, “Friend Gautama, we waited for you at the noon meal but you
never appeared. Why didn’t you join us?”
   The Buddha responded that he had wished to be absent during the lecture.
   “Why did you not wish to attend the lecture?” asked Uruvela Kassapa.
   The Buddha only smiled gently. The brahman did not say anything else. He
knew that the young monk had read his thoughts. How tactful and considerate
Gautama was!
   They sat by the lotus pond and conversed. Kassapa said, “Yesterday you said
that the presence of a leaf resulted from the coming together of many different
conditions. You said that humans, too, exist only because of the coming together
of many other conditions. But when all these conditions cease to be, where does
the self go?”
   The Buddha answered, “For a long time humans have been trapped by the
concept of atman, the concept of a separate and eternal self. We have believed
that when our body dies, this self continues to exist and seeks union with its
source, which is Brahma. But, friend Kassapa, that is a fundamental
misunderstanding which has caused countless generations to go astray.
   “You should know, friend Kassapa, that all things exist because of
interdependence and all things cease to be because of interdependence. This is
because that is. This is not because that is not. This is born because that is born.
This dies because that dies. This is the wonderful law of dependent co-arising
which I have discovered in my meditation. In truth, there is nothing which is
separate and eternal. There is no self, whether a higher or a lower self. Kassapa,
have you ever meditated on your body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations,


and consciousness? A person is made up of these five aggregates. They are
continuously changing rivers in which one cannot find even one permanent
element.”
   Uruvela Kassapa remained silent for a long moment. Then he asked, “Could
one say then that you teach the doctrine of non-being?”
   The Buddha smiled and shook his head. “No. The concept of non-being is one
narrow view among a whole forest of narrow views. The concept of non-being is
just as false as the concept of a separate, permanent self. Kassapa, look at the
surface of this lotus pond. I do not say that the water and lotus do not exist. I
only say that the water and the lotus arise thanks to the presence and
interpenetration of all other elements, none of which are separate or permanent.”
   Kassapa lifted his head and looked into the Buddha’s eyes. “If there is no self,
no atman, why should one practice a spiritual path in order to attain liberation?
Who will be liberated?”
   The Buddha looked deeply into the eyes of his brahmana friend. His gaze was
as radiant as the sun and as gentle as the soft moonlight. He smiled and said,
“Kassapa, look for the answer within yourself.”
   They returned together to Kassapa’s community. Uruvela Kassapa insisted on
giving the Buddha his hut for the night, and went to sleep himself in the hut of
one of his senior disciples. The Buddha could see how deeply Kassapa’s
disciples revered their teacher.


                           Chapter Twenty-Seven
                            All Dharmas Are on Fire
Every morning Kassapa brought the Buddha some food and so the Buddha did
not need to go begging in the village. After his daily meal, he walked alone on
forest paths or down to the lotus pond. In the later afternoons, Kassapa would
join him for discussion beneath the trees or beside the pond. The more time he
spent with the Buddha, the more Kassapa understood how wise and virtuous the
Buddha was.
   One night it rained so heavily that by morning the Neranjara River had
overflowed its banks. Nearby fields and dwellings were quickly submerged by
floodwaters. Boats desperately went out to try to rescue people. Kassapa’s
community was able to climb to higher land in time, but no one could find
Gautama. Kassapa sent several boats to look for him. At last he was found
standing on a distant hill.
   The water subsided as quickly as it had risen. The next morning the Buddha
took his begging bowl and went down into the village to see how the villagers
had fared in the flood. Luckily no one had drowned. The people told the Buddha
that because they did not own many possessions in the first place, the flood had
not robbed them of much.
   Kassapa’s disciples began to rebuild the Fire Sanctuary which had been
destroyed by fire and to rebuild their huts washed away by the flood.
   One afternoon, while the Buddha and Kassapa stood along the banks of the
Neranjara, Kassapa said, “Gautama, the other day you spoke about the
meditation on one’s body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and
consciousness. I have been practicing that meditation and I have begun to
understand how one’s feelings and perceptions determine the quality of one’s
life. I also see that there is no permanent element to be found in any of the five
rivers. I can even see that the belief in a separate self is false. But I still don’t
understand why one should follow a spiritual path if there is no self? Who is
there to be liberated?”
   The Buddha asked, “Kassapa, do you accept that suffering is a truth?”
   “Yes, Gautama, I accept that suffering is a truth.”


   “Do you agree that suffering has causes?”
   “Yes, I accept that suffering has causes.”
   “Kassapa, when the causes of suffering are present, suffering is present. When
the causes of suffering are removed, suffering is also removed.”
   “Yes, I see that when the causes of suffering are removed, suffering itself is
removed.”
   “The cause of suffering is ignorance, a false way of looking at reality.
Thinking the impermanent is permanent, that is ignorance. Thinking there is a
self when there is not, that is ignorance. From ignorance is born greed, anger,
fear, jealousy, and countless other sufferings. The path of liberation is the path of
looking deeply at things in order to truly realize the nature of impermanence, the
absence of a separate self, and the interdependence of all things. This path is the
path which overcomes ignorance. Once ignorance is overcome, suffering is
transcended. That is true liberation. There is no need for a self for there to be
liberation.”
   Uruvela Kassapa sat silently for a moment and then said, “Gautama, I know
you speak only from your own direct experience. Your words do not simply
express concepts. You have said that liberation can only be attained through the
efforts of meditation, by looking deeply at things. Do you think that all
ceremonies, rituals, and prayers are useless?”
   The Buddha pointed to the other side of the river and said, “Kassapa, if a
person wants to cross to the other shore, what should he do?”
   “If the water is shallow enough, he can wade across. Otherwise he will have to
swim or row a boat across.”
   “I agree. But what if he is unwilling to wade, swim, or row a boat? What if he
just stands on this side of the river and prays to the other shore to come to him?
What would you think of such a man?”
   “I would say he was being quite foolish!”
   “Just so, Kassapa! If one doesn’t overcome ignorance and mental
obstructions, one cannot cross to the other side to liberation, even if one spends
one’s whole life praying.”
   Suddenly Kassapa burst into tears and prostrated himself before the Buddha’s
feet. “Gautama, I have wasted more than half my life. Please accept me as your
disciple and give me the chance to study and practice the way of liberation with
you.”
   The Buddha helped Kassapa stand back up and said, “I would not hesitate to
accept you as my disciple, but what of your five hundred devotees? Who will


guide them if you leave?”
   Kassapa answered, “Gautama, give me a chance to speak with them this
morning. Tomorrow afternoon I will let you know of my decision.”
   The Buddha said, “The children in Uruvela village call me the Buddha.”
   Kassapa was surprised. “That means the Awakened One, doesn’t it? I will call
you the same.”
   The next morning, the Buddha went begging in Uruvela village. Afterwards
he went to the lotus pond to sit. Late that afternoon, Kassapa came looking for
him. He told the Buddha that all five hundred of his devotees agreed to become
disciples under the Buddha’s guidance.
   The next day, Uruvela Kassapa and all his followers shaved their heads and
beards, and threw the locks of hair into the Neranjara River along with all the
liturgical objects they had used for fire worship. They bowed before the Buddha
and recited three times, “I take refugee in the Buddha, the one who shows me the
way in this life. I take refuge in the Dharma, the way of understanding and love.
I take refuge in the Sangha, the community that lives in harmony and
awareness.” Their recitation of the three refuges echoed throughout the forest.
   When the ordination was completed, the Buddha spoke to the new bhikkhus
about the Four Noble Truths and how to observe one’s breath, body, and mind.
He showed them how to beg for food and how to eat in silence. He asked them
to release all the animals they had once raised for food and sacrifices.
   That afternoon the Buddha met with Kassapa and ten of Kassapa’s senior
students to teach them the fundamentals of the Way of Awakening as well as to
discuss how to best organize the sangha. Kassapa was a talented organizer and
leader, and, with the Buddha, he assigned capable senior students to train the
younger bhikkhus, just as the Buddha had done in Isipatana.
   The next day Nadi Kassapa, Uruvela Kassapa’s younger brother, arrived with
his disciples in a state of shock. The day before, he and his three hundred
devotees who lived downstream from Uruvela had seen hundreds of braids and
liturgical objects floating in the river and they feared some terrible catastrophe
had befallen the community of his elder brother. When Nadi Kassapa reached
Uruvela it was the hour of begging and so he was unable to find anyone. His
worst fears seemed to be confirmed. But slowly bhikkhus began to return from
begging and they explained how they had all taken vows to follow a monk
named Gautama. Uruvela Kassapa returned from begging with the Buddha and
was most happy to see his younger brother. He invited him for a walk in the
forest. They were gone for a good length of time, and when they returned Nadi


Kassapa announced that he and his three hundred devotees would also take
refuge in the Buddha. Both brothers agreed to send someone to summon their
brother, Gaya Kassapa. Thus, in the space of only seven days, the two hundred
devotees of Gaya Kassapa were also ordained as bhikkhus. The Kassapa brothers
were well known for their brotherly love and sharing of common ideals.
Together they became deeply devoted students of the Buddha.
   One day after all the bhikkhus had returned from begging, the Buddha
summoned them to gather on the slopes of the mountain in Gaya. Nine hundred
bhikkhus ate in silence with the Buddha and the three Kassapa brothers. When
they were finished eating, they all turned their gaze to the Buddha.
   Sitting serenely upon a large rock, the Buddha began to speak, “Bhikkhus, all
dharmas are on fire. What is on fire? The six sense organs—eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, body and mind—are all on fire. The six objects of the senses—form,
sound, smell, taste, touch, and objects of mind—are all on fire. The six
consciousnesses—sight, hearing, smell, taste, feeling, and thought—are all on
fire. They are burning from the flames of desire, hatred, and illusion. They are
burning from the flames of birth, old age, sickness, and death, and from the
flames of pain, anxiety, frustration, worry, fear, and despair.
   “Bhikkhus, every feeling is burning whether it is an unpleasant, pleasant, or
neutral feeling. Feelings arise and are conditioned by the sense organs, objects of
the sense organs, and the sense-consciousnesses. Feelings are burning from the
flames of desire, hatred, and illusion. Feelings are burning from the flames of
birth, old age, sickness, and death, and from the flames of pain, anxiety,
frustration, worry, fear, and despair.
   “Bhikkhus, do not allow yourselves to be consumed by the flames of desire,
hatred, and illusion. See the impermanent and interdependent nature of all
dharmas in order not to be enslaved by the cycle of birth and death created by
the sense organs, objects of the senses, and the sense-consciousnesses.”
   Nine hundred bhikkhus listened intently. Each man was deeply moved. They
were happy to know they had found the path that taught how to look deeply in
order to attain liberation. Faith welled in the heart of every bhikkhu there.
   The Buddha remained in Gayasisa for three months to teach the new
bhikkhus, and the bhikkhus made great progress. The Kassapa brothers were
talented assistants to the Buddha, and they helped him guide and teach the
sangha.


                          Chapter Twenty-Eight
                                    Palm Forest
The morning had arrived for the Buddha to depart from Gayasisa and make his
way to Rajagaha. Uruvela Kassapa asked the Buddha to allow the entire sangha
to accompany him. The Buddha was reluctant, but Kassapa explained how easily
nine hundred bhikkhus could travel together. There would be many forests
around Rajagaha where the bhikkhus could dwell. They could beg in the many
villages there, as well as in the capital city itself, making contact with many local
people. Moreover, added Kassapa, the number of bhikkhus was now too large
for the population of Gaya to support. Everything would be easier in Rajagaha.
Seeing how knowledgeable Uruvela Kassapa was about the situation in
Magadha, the Buddha agreed to let the nine hundred bhikkhus join him.
   The Kassapa brothers divided the sangha into thirty-six groups of twenty-five
bhikkhus. Each group was led by a senior student. This arrangement allowed the
bhikkhus to make ever greater progress on the path.
   Ten days were needed for them all to reach Rajagaha. Each morning, they
begged in small villages and ate silently in the forests or fields. When they
finished eating, they began to walk again, traveling in their own small groups.
The sight of the bhikkhus walking quietly and slowly made a deep impression on
all who saw them.
   When they neared Rajagaha, Uruvela Kassapa led them to Palm Forest, where
the Supatthita temple was located. Palm Forest was only two miles south of the
capital. The next morning the bhikkhus took their bowls and went begging in the
city. They walked single file in their small groups, taking calm, slow steps. They
held their bowls serenely while their eyes looked straight ahead. Following the
Buddha’s instructions, they stood before each house without discriminating
whether it belonged to rich or poor. If no one appeared after a few moments,
they moved on to the next house. While silently waiting for food offerings to be
made, they mindfully observed their breath. When they received a food offering,
they bowed in thanks. They never made any comments about whether the food
looked good or bad. Sometimes the layperson making the offering asked the
bhikkhu a few questions about the Dharma, and the bhikkhu answered


thoughtfully to the best of his ability. The bhikkhu explained that he belonged to
the sangha of Gautama the Buddha. He would speak about the Four Noble
Truths, the five precepts for the laity, and the Noble Eightfold Path.
   The bhikkhus always returned to Palm Forest by noon to share their meal in
silence before listening to a discourse on the Dharma given by the Buddha.
Afternoons and evenings were reserved for meditation practice. Thus after the
noon hour, no one in the city saw the saffron-robed bhikkhus.
   By the end of two weeks, most of the city was aware of the presence of the
Buddha’s sangha. On cool afternoons, many laypersons came to Palm Forest to
meet the Buddha and to learn about the Way of Awakening. Before the Buddha
had had a chance to visit his friend, the young King Seniya Bimbisara had
already learned of the Buddha’s presence. Sure that this new teacher was the
same young monk he had met on the mountain, he mounted his carriage and
ordered it driven to Palm Forest. Many other carriages followed his for he had
invited over a hundred highly regarded brahmana teachers and intellectuals to
join him. When they reached the edge of the forest, the king stepped out of his
carriage, accompanied by the queen and their son, Prince Ajatasattu.
   When the Buddha was informed of the king’s arrival, he and Uruvela Kassapa
personally went out to greet him and all his guests. All the bhikkhus were seated
in great circles on the earth waiting to hear the Buddha’s Dharma talk. The
Buddha invited the king, queen, prince, and other guests to be seated, too. King
Bimbisara introduced as many of the guests as he could remember names, but
sometimes had to ask a brahman to introduce himself. Among the guests were
many scholars well-versed in the Vedas and belonging to many different schools
of religious thought.
   Most of these men had heard the name of Uruvela Kassapa. A number of them
had even met him before. But no one had ever heard of the Buddha. They were
surprised to see how reverently Kassapa treated the Buddha, even though
Gautama Sakya was so much younger than Kassapa. They whispered to one
another, trying to figure out whether Gautama was Kassapa’s disciple or Kassapa
was Gautama’s disciple. Aware of their confusion, Uruvela Kassapa stood up
and approached the Buddha. He joined his palms and spoke clearly and with
respect, “Gautama, the Enlightened One, Most Precious Teacher in this life—I
am Uruvela Kassapa, your disciple. Allow me to offer you my most profound
respect.” Then he prostrated himself before the Buddha three times. The Buddha
helped Kassapa stand up again and asked him to sit by his side. There were no
more whispers among the brahmans. Indeed, their respect increased as they


looked out over the nine hundred saffron-robed bhikkhus sitting with awe-
inspiring solemnity.
   The Buddha spoke about the Way of Awakening. He spoke about the
impermanent and interdependent nature of all things in life. He said that the Path
of Awakening could help one overcome false views and transcend suffering. He
spoke about how observing the precepts could help one attain concentration and
understanding. His voice resounded like a great bell. It was as warm as spring
sunshine, as gentle as a light rain, and as majestic as the rising tide. More than
one thousand people listened. No one dared to breathe too loudly or rustle their
robes for fear of disturbing the sound of the Buddha’s wondrous voice.
   King Bimbisara’s eyes grew brighter by the moment. The more he listened,
the more he felt his heart open. So many of his doubts and troubles vanished. A
radiant smile appeared on his face. When the Buddha concluded his Dharma
talk, King Bimbisara stood up and joined his palms. He said, “Lord, from the
time I was young, I had five wishes. I have now fulfilled them all. The first wish
was to receive coronation and become king. That has been fulfilled. The second
wish was to meet in this very life an enlightened teacher. That has also been
fulfilled. The third wish was to have a chance to show respect to such a teacher.
That wish has now been fulfilled. The fourth wish was to have such a teacher
show me the true path. That wish has now been fulfilled. And the fifth wish was
to be able to understand the teaching of the Enlightened One. Master, this wish
has just been fulfilled. Your wondrous teaching has brought me much
understanding. Lord, please accept me as your lay disciple.”
   The Buddha smiled his acceptance.
   The king invited the Buddha and all nine hundred of his bhikkhus to have a
meal at the palace on the day of the full moon. The Buddha gladly accepted.
   All the other guests stood up to thank the Buddha. Twenty of them expressed
the desire to be accepted as the Buddha’s disciples. The Buddha and Uruvela
Kassapa accompanied the king, queen, and little prince Ajatasattu back to the
edge of the forest.
   The Buddha knew that in less than a month, the rainy season would begin, and
it would be impossible to return to his homeland. Therefore, he resolved to
remain with the nine hundred bhikkhus in Palm Forest for another three months.
He knew that after three months of practice, the sangha would be strong and
stable enough for him to depart. He would leave in the spring, the season of clear
skies and tender new plants.
   King Seniya Bimbisara began at once to prepare for the reception of the


Buddha and his bhikkhus. He planned to serve them in the great palace court
paved with fine bricks. He called to his people to deck the streets with lanterns
and flowers to welcome the Buddha and his sangha. He invited a great many
other people to attend, including all the members of the government and their
families. Children close to the age of twelve-year-old Prince Ajatasattu were
invited, too. Knowing that the Buddha and his bhikkhus did not allow others to
kill for their sake, he ordered that only delicious vegetarian foods be prepared.
They had ten days to prepare for the reception.


                            Chapter Twenty-Nine
                              Dependent Co-Arising
Throughout the following weeks, many seekers came to the Buddha and asked
to be ordained as bhikkhus. Many of them were highly educated young men
from wealthy families. The Buddha’s senior students performed the ordination
ceremonies and gave the new bhikkhus basic instruction in the practice. Other
young people, women as well as men, came to Palm Forest and took the three
refuges.
   One day Kondanna gave the three refuges to a gathering of nearly three
hundred young people. After the ceremony, he spoke to them about the three
precious gems—the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha.
   “The Buddha is the Awakened One. An awakened person sees the nature of
life and the cosmos. Because of that, an awakened person is not bound by
illusion, fear, anger, or desire. An awakened person is a free person, filled with
peace and joy, love and understanding. Master Gautama, our Teacher, is a
completely awakened person. He shows us the way in this life so that we may
overcome forgetfulness and become awakened ourselves. Every one of us
contains Buddha-nature. We can all become a Buddha. Buddha-nature is the
capacity to awaken and transcend all ignorance. If we practice the way of
awareness, our Buddha-nature will shine more brightly every day until one day,
we, too, shall attain total freedom, peace, and joy. We must each find the Buddha
within our own heart. The Buddha is the first precious gem.
   “The Dharma is the path which leads to Awakening. It is the path which the
Buddha teaches, the path which helps us to transcend the prisons of ignorance,
anger, fear, and desire. This path leads to freedom, peace, and joy. It enables us
to love and understand all others. Understanding and love are the two most
beautiful fruits of the Path of Awakening. The Dharma is the second precious
gem.
   “The Sangha is the community of persons practicing the Way of Awakening,
those who travel this path together. If you want to practice the way of liberation,
it is important to have a community to practice with. If you are all alone,
difficulties along the path may hinder your realization of awakening. It is


important to take refuge in the Sangha, whether you are an ordained bhikkhu or
a lay person. The Sangha is the third precious gem.
   “Young people, today you have taken refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and
the Sangha. With the support of these refuges, you will not wander aimlessly but
will be able to make real progress on the Path of Enlightenment. It has been two
years since I took refuge in the three gems myself. Today you have vowed to
travel the same path. Let us rejoice together that we have taken refuge in the
three precious gems. Of course, these gems have been present in our own hearts
from beginningless time. Together we will practice the way of liberation to allow
these three gems to shine from within us.”
   The young people were greatly encouraged by Kondanna’s words. They all
felt a new source of vitality surge within their hearts.
   During those same days, the Buddha received two exceptional new disciples,
Sariputta and Moggallana, into his sangha of bhikkhus. They were both disciples
of the famous ascetic Sanjaya, who lived in Rajagaha. Sanjaya’s devotees were
called parivrajakas. Sariputta and Moggallana were close friends, respected for
their intelligence and open-mindedness. They had promised each other that
whoever attained the Great Way first would immediately inform the other.
   One day Sariputta saw the bhikkhu Assaji begging in Rajagaha, and he was
immediately drawn by Assaji’s relaxed and serene bearing. Sariputta thought to
himself, “This appears to be someone who has attained the Way. I knew such
persons could be found! I will ask him who his Teacher is and what his teaching
is.”
   Sariputta quickened his pace to catch up with Assaji but then stopped himself,
not wanting to disturb the bhikkhu while he was silently begging from house to
house. Sariputta resolved to wait until Assaji was finished begging before
approaching him. Without making himself noticed, Sariputta followed Assaji.
When Assaji’s bowl was filled with offerings and he turned to leave the city,
Sariputta joined his palms in respectful greeting and said, “Monk, you radiate
such peace and calm. Your virtue and understanding shine in the way you walk,
in the expression on your face, and in your every gesture. Please allow me to ask
who your Teacher is and at what practice center you reside. What methods does
your teacher teach?”
   Assaji looked at Sariputta for a moment and then smiled in a most friendly
manner. He answered, “I study and practice under the guidance of the Master
Gautama of the Sakya clan who is known as the Buddha. He is presently
dwelling near Supatthita Temple in Palm Forest.”


   Sariputta’s eyes brightened. “What is his teaching? Can you share it with
me?”
   “The Buddha’s teaching is deep and lovely. I have not grasped it fully yet. You
should come and receive the teachings directly from the Buddha.”
   But Sariputta implored Assaji, “Please, can’t you share with me even a few
words of the Buddha’s teaching? It would be so precious to me. I will come for
more teaching later.”
   Assaji smiled and then recited a short gatha:
     “From interdependent origins
     all things arise
     and all things pass away.
     So teaches the
     Perfectly Enlightened One.”
   Sariputta suddenly felt his heart open as though it were being flooded by
bright light. A flawless glimpse of true Dharma flashed before him. He bowed to
Assaji and quickly ran to seek his friend Moggallana.
   When Moggallana saw Sariputta’s radiant face, he asked, “My brother, what
has made you so happy? Can you have found the true path? Please tell me,
brother!”
   Sariputta related what had just happened. When he recited the gatha for
Moggallana to hear, Moggallana also felt a sudden flash of light illuminate his
heart and mind. Suddenly he saw the universe as an interconnected net. This was
because that was, this arose because that arose, this was not because that was
not, this passed away because that passed away. The belief in a creator of all
things vanished in this understanding of dependent co-arising. He now
understood how one could cut through the endless cycle of birth and death. The
door of liberation opened before him.
   Moggallana said, “Brother, we must go to the Buddha at once. He is the
Teacher we have been waiting for.”
   Sariputta agreed, but reminded him, “What of the two hundred fifty
parivrajaka brothers who have long placed their faith and trust in us as elder
brothers of the community? We can’t just abandon them. We must go and inform
them of our decision first.”
   The two friends made their way to the parivrajaka main gathering place and
explained to their fellow practitioners their decision to leave the community and


become disciples of the Buddha. When the parivrajakas heard that Sariputta and
Moggallana were about to leave them, they were grieved. The community would
not be the same without these two elder brothers. And so, they all expressed their
desire to follow them and become disciples of the Buddha, too.
   Sariputta and Moggallana went to Master Sanjaya and told him of the decision
of the community. He entreated them to stay, saying “If you remain here, I will
transfer the leadership of the community to you both.” He said this three times,
but Sariputta and Moggallana had made up their minds.
   They said, “Respected Master, we embarked on the spiritual path in order to
find liberation, and not to become religious leaders. If we do not know the true
path, how can we lead others? We must seek out the Master Gautama for he has
attained the path we have long sought for.”
   Sariputta and Moggallana prostrated themselves before Sanjaya and then
departed, followed by the other parivrajakas. They walked to Palm Forest where
they all prostrated before the Buddha and asked to be ordained. The Buddha
spoke to them about the Four Noble Truths and accepted them as bhikkhus in his
sangha. After the ordination ceremony, the number of bhikkhus in Palm Grove
numbered 1,250.
Here ends Book One.


BOOK TWO

                                 Chapter Thirty
                                  Bamboo Forest
It was the full moon day. The Buddha took his bowl and entered the city of
Rajagaha with his 1,250 bhikkhus. They walked silently with slow, calm steps.
The streets of the capital were decorated with lanterns and fresh flowers. Crowds
flanked both sides of the streets to welcome the Buddha and his sangha. When
the bhikkhus came to the main crossroads, the crowd was so thick that it was
impossible for the Buddha and his bhikkhus to proceed.
   Uruvela Kassapa was wondering what to do, when a handsome young fellow
appeared, singing and playing a sixteen-string sitar. His voice resonated like a
clear bell. As he walked through the crowds singing, the people moved to the
sides to let him pass. There was now a path for the Buddha and his bhikkhus to
continue walking. Kassapa recognized the musician, who had taken the three
refuges with him less than a month earlier. His song expressed his deep feelings:
      “On this fresh spring morning,
      the Enlightened One passes through our city
      with the noble community of 1,250 disciples.
      All are walking with slow, calm, and radiant steps.”
   The crowds listened to the young musician as if entranced, and they looked
from him to the Buddha passing before them. The singer smiled and continued to
sing:
      “Grateful for this chance to be his student,
      let me praise his endless love and wisdom,
      the path that leads to self-contentment,
      and the Sangha which follows the True Way
      to Awakening.”
   The young man continued to sing and open up a path until the Buddha and all
the bhikkhus reached the palace gates. Then he bowed to the Buddha and


disappeared back into the crowds as quickly as he had appeared.
   King Bimbisara, accompanied by six thousand attendants and guests, came
out to welcome the Buddha. The king led the Buddha and the bhikkhus to the
royal courtyard where spacious tents had been set up to shade the guests from
the hot sun. The Buddha was given the place of honor at the center of the
courtyard. All the places for the bhikkhus had been prepared with utmost care.
Once the Buddha was seated, King Bimbisara invited everyone else to be seated.
The king and Uruvela Kassapa sat on either side of the Buddha.
   Prince Ajatasattu carried a basin of water and a towel to the Buddha for him to
wash his hands and feet. Other attendants brought water and towels for all the
bhikkhus. After that, the vegetarian feast was laid upon the tables. The king
personally placed food into the Buddha’s bowl while Queen Videhi directed
servants to serve the bhikkhus. The Buddha and the bhikkhus recited special
gathas before eating. King Bimbisara and his royal guests maintained perfect
silence throughout the meal. All six thousand guests were impressed by the calm
and joyous countenance of the Buddha and his bhikkhus.
   When the Buddha and all of the 1,250 bhikkhus were finished eating, their
bowls were taken and washed and then returned. King Bimbisara turned towards
the Buddha and joined his palms. Understanding the king’s wishes, the Buddha
began to teach the Dharma. He spoke about the five precepts as the way to create
peace and happiness for one’s family and all the kingdom.
   “The first precept is do not kill. Observing this precept nourishes compassion.
All living beings fear death. As we cherish our own lives, we should cherish the
lives of all other beings. Not only should we refrain from taking human life, we
should strive to avoid taking the lives of other species. We must live in harmony
with people, animals, and plants. If we nourish a heart of love, we can reduce
suffering and create a happy life. If every citizen observes the precept not to kill,
the kingdom will have peace. When the people respect each other’s lives, the
country will prosper and be strong, and it will be safe from invasion by other
countries. Even if the kingdom possesses great military force, there will be no
reason to use it. Soldiers can devote time to such worthy tasks as building roads,
bridges, marketplaces, and dams.
King Bimbisara, accompanied by six thousand attendants and guests, came out
to welcome the Buddha.


   “The second precept is do not steal. No one has the right to take away the
possessions that another has earned by his own labor. Attempting to seize
another’s goods violates this precept. Do not cheat others or use your influence
and power to encroach on other’s goods. Making profits from the sweat and
labor of others violates this precept, as well. If the citizens observe this precept,
social equality will flower and robbing and killing will quickly cease.
   “The third precept is avoid sexual misconduct. Sexual relations should only
take place with your spouse. Observing this precept builds trust and happiness in
the family, and prevents unnecessary suffering to others. If you want happiness
and the time and will to help your country and people, abstain from having


several concubines.
   “The fourth precept is do not lie. Do not speak words that can create division
and hatred. Your words should be in accord with the truth. Yes means yes. No
means no. Words have the power to create trust and happiness, or they can create
misunderstanding and hatred and even lead to murder and war. Please use words
with the greatest care.
   “The fifth precept is do not drink alcohol or use other intoxicants. Alcohol and
intoxicants rob the mind of clarity. When someone is intoxicated he can cause
untold suffering to himself, his family, and others. Observing this precept is to
preserve health for the body and mind. This precept should be observed at all
times.
   “If your majesty and all high-ranking officials study and observe these five
precepts, the kingdom will benefit greatly. Your majesty, a king stands at the
helm of his country. He must live with awareness and know all that is happening
in his kingdom at all times. If you see to it that those under your charge
understand and observe the five precepts, the five principles of living in peace
and harmony, the country of Magadha will thrive.”
   Overcome with joy, King Bimbisara stood and bowed before the Buddha.
Queen Videhi approached the Buddha, holding the hand of her son, Prince
Ajatasattu. She showed the prince how to join his palms like a lotus bud and
respectfully greet the Buddha. She said, “Lord Buddha, Prince Ajatasattu and
four hundred other children are present today. Can you teach them about the
Way of Awareness and Love?”
   The queen bowed before the Buddha. The Buddha smiled. He reached out and
clasped the young prince’s hand. The queen turned around and motioned for the
other children to come forward. They were the children of noble and wealthy
families and were dressed in the finest of garments. Boys as well as girls wore
golden bracelets around their wrists and ankles. The girls were dressed in
shimmering saris of many colors. Prince Ajatasattu sat down by the feet of the
Buddha. The Buddha thought of the poor country children he shared a picnic
with so long ago beneath the rose-apple tree in Kapilavatthu. He silently
promised himself that when he returned home he would seek out such children
and share the teaching with them, too.
   The Buddha spoke to the children before him. “Children, before I was a
human being, I lived as earth and stones, plants, birds, and many other animals.
You, too, have had past lives as earth and stones, plants, birds, and animals.
Perhaps you are here before me today because of some connection we shared in


a past life. Perhaps in another life we brought one another joy or sorrow.
   “Today I would like to tell you a story that took place several thousand
lifetimes ago. It is the story of a heron, a crab, a plumeria tree, and many small
shrimp and fish. In that life, I was the plumeria tree. Perhaps one among you was
the heron or the crab or one of the shrimp. In this story, the heron was a wicked
and deceitful creature who caused death and suffering to many others. The heron
made me, the plumeria tree, suffer, too. But from that suffering, I learned a great
lesson and that was—if you deceive and harm others, in turn, you will be
deceived and harmed.
   “I was a plumeria tree growing close to a fragrant, cool lotus pond. No fish
lived in that pond. But not far from that pond was a shallow and stagnant pond in
which many fish and shrimp and one crab lived. A heron flying overhead saw
the crowded situation of the fish and shrimp and devised a scheme. He landed at
the edge of their pond and stood there with a long, sad face.
   “The fish and shrimp asked him, ‘Mister Heron, what are you thinking about
so seriously?’
   “‘I’m thinking about your poor lot in life. Your pond is muddy and foul. You
lack adequate food. I feel terrible pity for your hard lives.’
   “‘Do you know of any way to help us, Mister Heron?’ asked the small
creatures.
   “‘Well, if you would allow me to carry each one of you over to the lotus pond
not far from here, I could release you in the cool waters there. There is plenty to
eat over there.’
   “‘We would like to believe you, Mister Heron, but we have never heard that
herons care anything about the lot of fish or shrimp. Perhaps you only want to
trick us in order to eat us up.’
   “‘Why are you so suspicious? You should think of me as a kind uncle. I have
no reason to deceive you. There really is a large lotus pond not far from here
filled with plenty of fresh, cool water. If you don’t believe me, let me fly one of
you over there to see for himself. Then I’ll fly him back to tell you whether or
not I’m telling the truth.’
   “The shrimp and fish discussed the matter at some length before at last
agreeing to allow one of the elder fish to go with the heron. This fish was tough
and bristly, his scales as hard as stones. He was a swift swimmer who could also
maneuver well on sand. The heron picked him up in his beak and flew him to the
lotus pond. He released the old fish into the cool waters and let him explore
every nook and cranny of the pond. The pond was indeed spacious, cool,


refreshing, and a plentiful source of food. When the heron returned him to the
old pond, the fish reported all he had seen.
   “Convinced of the heron’s good intentions, the shrimp and fish begged him to
fly them to the pond one by one. The crafty heron agreed. He picked up a fish in
his beak and flew off. But this time, instead of releasing the fish into the pond,
he landed near the plumeria tree. He placed the fish in a fork of the tree and
ripped off its flesh with his beak. He tossed its bones by the plumeria’s roots.
Then he returned to transport another fish. He devoured it as well, and discarded
its bones by the foot of the plumeria tree.
   “I was that plumeria, and I witnessed all this taking place. I was enraged, but
there was nothing I could do to stop the heron. A plumeria’s roots are firmly
anchored in the earth. There is nothing a plumeria can do but grow branches,
leaves, and flowers. It cannot run anywhere. I could not call out and warn the
shrimp and fish about what was really happening. I could not even stretch my
branches to prevent the heron from eating the helpless creatures. I could only
witness the horrible scene. Every time the heron brought a fish in its beak and
began to tear at its flesh, I was filled with pain. I felt as though my sap would dry
up and my branches break. Drops of moisture like tears collected on my bark.
The heron did not notice. Over a number of days, he continued to bring the fish
over to devour them. When all the fish were gone, he began to eat the shrimp.
The pile of bones and shells that piled up by my roots could have filled two large
baskets.
   “I knew that as a plumeria tree my job was to beautify the forest with my
fragrant flowers. But at that moment I suffered terribly from not being able to do
anything to save the shrimp and fish. If I had been a deer or a person I could
have done something. But anchored by my roots to the ground, I could not
move. I vowed that if I were reborn as an animal or a human in a future life, I
would devote all my efforts to protect the weak and helpless from the strong and
powerful.
   “When the heron had devoured all the shrimp and fish, only the crab
remained. Still hungry, the heron said to the crab, ‘Nephew, I have carried all the
fish and shrimp to the lotus pond where they now live happily. You are all alone
here now. Let me take you to the new pond, too.’
   “‘How will you carry me?’ asked the crab.
   “‘In my beak, just as I carried all the others.’
   “‘What if I slipped out and fell? My shell would shatter into a hundred
pieces.’


    “‘Don’t worry. I’ll carry you with utmost care.’
    “The crab thought carefully. Perhaps the heron had kept his word and truly
carried all the shrimp and fish to the lotus pond. But what if he had deceived
them and eaten them all? The crab devised a plan to insure his own safety. He
said to the heron, ‘Uncle, I’m afraid your beak is not strong enough to hold me
securely. Let me wrap my claws around your neck to hold on while you fly.’
    “The heron agreed. He waited for the crab to crawl onto his neck and then he
spread his wings and flew into the air. But instead of carrying the crab to the
lotus pond, he landed by the plumeria tree.
    “‘Uncle, why don’t you put me down by the lotus pond? Why did we land
here instead?’
    “‘What heron would be so stupid as to carry a bunch of fish to a lotus pond? I
am no benefactor, nephew. Do you see all those fish bones and shrimp shells at
the foot of the plumeria? This is where your life will end, as well.’
    “‘Uncle, the fish and shrimp may have been easily fooled, but you can’t trick
me so easily. Take me to the lotus pond at once or I will cut off your head with
my claws.’
    “The crab began to dig his sharp claws into the heron’s neck. Seized by sharp
pain, the heron cried out, ‘Don’t squeeze so hard! I’ll take you to the lotus pond
right this minute! I promise I won’t try to eat you!’
    “The heron flew to the lotus pond where it intended to let the crab down by
the water’s edge. But the crab did not release its hold on the heron’s neck.
Thinking about all the fish and shrimp so cruelly deceived by the heron, the crab
dug his claws deeper and deeper into the heron’s neck until he cut right through
it. The heron dropped down dead and the crab crawled into the water.
    “Children, at that time I was the plumeria tree. I witnessed all these events. I
learned that if we treat others kindly, we will be treated kindly in return; but if
we treat others cruelly, sooner or later, we will suffer the same fate. I vowed that
in all my future lives, I would endeavor to help other beings.”
    The children listened to the Buddha’s tale with great interest. They were
moved by the plumeria’s pain, and they felt pity for the helpless fish and shrimp.
They despised the heron’s deceit and were impressed by the crab’s shrewdness.
    King Bimbisara stood up. He joined his palms and bowed. He said, “Master,
you have shared an important lesson with young and old alike. I pray that Prince
Ajatasattu remembers your words. Our kingdom is blessed to have you among
us. I would now like to present you and your sangha with a gift, if you agree.”
    The Buddha looked at the king, waiting for him to explain. After a moment of


silence, the king continued, “About two miles north of Rajagaha, there is a large
and beautiful forest known as Venuvana, Bamboo Forest. It is quiet and serene,
cool and refreshing. Many gentle squirrels inhabit that forest. I would like to
offer you and your sangha Venuvana as a place where you can teach and practice
the Way. O Great Teacher of Compassion, please accept this gift from my heart.”
   The Buddha reflected for a moment. It was the first time the sangha had been
offered land for a monastery. Certainly his bhikkhus did need a place to dwell
during the rainy season. The Buddha breathed deeply and smiled, and he nodded
his head in acceptance of the king’s generous gift. King Bimbisara was
overjoyed. He knew that the presence of the monastery would mean that the
Buddha would spend more time in Magadha.
   Among the many guests at the palace that day were a large number of
brahmana religious leaders. Many of them were not pleased with the king’s
decision but they did not dare to say anything.
   The king asked for a golden vase of water. He poured the clear water over the
Buddha’s hands and solemnly announced, “Master, as the water in this vase
pours over your hands, Bamboo Forest is transferred to you and your sangha.”
   This ritual concluded the offering of Bamboo Forest from the king to the
Buddha. The ceremonial feast came to an end, and the Buddha and his 1,250
bhikkhus departed from the palace.


                           Chapter Thirty-One
                         I Will Return in the Spring
The very next day, the Buddha visited Bamboo Forest with several of his senior
students. It was an ideal location for the sangha, with nearly one hundred acres
of healthy bamboo groves. Many kinds of bamboo grew there. At the center of
the forest, Kalandaka Lake would be a perfect place for the bhikkhus to bathe,
wash their robes, and do walking meditation along the shore. Because the
bamboo was so plentiful, it would be easy to build small huts for the older
monks to live in. The Buddha’s senior students, including Kondanna, Kassapa,
and Sariputta, were all delighted with Bamboo Forest. They began planning at
once how to best organize a monastery there.
   The Buddha said, “The monsoon season is not a good time for travel. The
bhikkhus need a place to study and practice together during the rains. Having a
place like this will help the community avoid illness from exposure to the
elements and also avoid stepping on the many worms and insects that are
washed up on the ground during the rainy season. From now on, I would like the
bhikkhus to return to a common place at the beginning of every rainy season. We
can ask lay disciples of the area to bring food offerings during the three months
of retreat. The lay disciples will also benefit from the teachings offered by the
bhikkhus.” Thus, the tradition of the rainy season retreat began.
   Under Moggallana’s supervision, the younger bhikkhus built huts from
bamboo, thatch, and pounded earth for the Buddha and the older bhikkhus. The
Buddha’s hut, though small, was quite lovely. Behind it grew a thicket of golden
bamboo and to one side grew a thicket of taller green bamboo which provided
cool shade. Bhikkhu Nagasamala built a low, wooden platform for the Buddha to
sleep upon. He also placed a large earthenware vessel for washing behind the
Buddha’s hut. Nagasamala was a young bhikkhu who had been Uruvela
Kassapa’s disciple. He was asked by Kassapa to serve as an attendant to the
Buddha when the sangha moved to Bamboo Forest.
   Sariputta arranged with a lay disciple from the capital to have a large bell
donated to Bamboo Forest Monastery. He hung it from the branch of an ancient
tree near Kalandaka Lake. The bell was used to announce times for study and


meditation, and became a special part of the practice of mindfulness. The
Buddha taught his bhikkhus to pause and observe their breath whenever they
heard the bell ring.
    Lay disciples assisted in many ways. Kassapa explained to them about the
retreat season. “This retreat season will afford all the bhikkhus an opportunity to
practice the way of liberation directly under the guidance of the Buddha. They
will have time for more intensive study and practice. At the same time, they will
avoid accidentally crushing worms and insects on the ground during the rainy
season. You can assist the sangha during these three months of retreat by
bringing food offerings. If possible, please try to coordinate your efforts to
assure that there is the right amount of food each day, neither too much nor too
little. Even the poorest of the poor, those who can only offer a chapati or two,
will be invited to stay and listen to the Buddha or one of the senior students give
a discourse on the Dharma each day. The retreat season will benefit bhikkhus
and lay disciples alike.”
    Kassapa proved to be as talented at organizing the laity as he was at
organizing the bhikkhus. He met with lay sponsors of the monastery and helped
them organize the food offerings and other forms of assistance. He assured that
every bhikkhu received a robe, begging bowl, meditation cushion, towel, and
water filter for personal use.
    The first day of the retreat arrived and the sangha followed the schedule that
had been carefully thought out by the Buddha and his senior students. The wake-
up bell rang at four in the morning. After washing up, the bhikkhus did walking
meditation on their own. They continued to alternate sessions of sitting and
walking meditation until the sun peeked over the tops of the bamboos. Normally
that was the time to go begging, but since during the retreat food was brought to
them by the laity, the bhikkhus had some extra time to meet with their individual
teachers to study the Dharma in greater depth and to discuss any difficulties they
were having in their practice. Bhikkhus who served as teachers were selected
according to the depth of progress they had made on the path. Elders, such as
Kondanna, Assaji, Kassapa, Sariputta, Moggallana, Vappa, and Mahanama, each
guided fifty or sixty younger bhikkhus. Other teachers were given responsibility
for ten to thirty students. Every new bhikkhu was assigned a personal teacher
who served as his elder brother in the practice. Kassapa and Sariputta personally
organized this system.
    Shortly before midday, the bhikkhus gathered by the lake and stood in lines
holding their begging bowls. Food was divided and shared equally. When


everyone had been served, they all sat on the grassy shores and ate in silence.
When the meal was completed and the bowls washed, everyone turned towards
the Buddha. On some days he directed his teaching to the bhikkhus but in a way
which was also helpful to the laity. On other days he directed his teaching to the
laity but in a way which also benefited the bhikkhus. Sometimes his teaching
was addressed especially to the children present. In those Dharma talks, he often
told past life tales.
   Sometimes one of the Buddha’s senior students gave the Dharma talk in his
place. The Buddha would sit and listen serenely, offering words of
encouragement when he saw that the Dharma was expressed in a correct and
clear manner. After the Dharma talks, the lay disciples would return home, and
the bhikkhus would rest until the afternoon bell announced the time to resume
sitting and walking meditation. The bhikkhus practiced until midnight, before
retiring.
   The Buddha sat in meditation far into the night. He liked to place his bamboo
platform outside his hut and sit on it, enjoying the cool night air, especially on
nights with a moon. Before dawn, he liked to do walking meditation around the
lake. Ever joyous, peaceful, and relaxed, the Buddha did not require as much
sleep as the younger bhikkhus. Kassapa sat in meditation far into the night also.
   King Bimbisara visited Bamboo Forest faithfully. He did not bring great
numbers of guests as he had the time he visited Palm Forest. Sometimes he was
accompanied by Queen Videhi and Prince Ajatasattu. Often he came alone. He
would leave his carriage at the edge of the forest and walk on his own to the
Buddha’s hut. One day after seeing the bhikkhus listening to the Dharma talk in
the rain, he asked the Buddha’s permission to build a large Dharma hall where
the bhikkhus could both eat and listen to the teaching without being drenched by
the rain. The Buddha consented, and work on the hall began right away. It was
large enough to shelter more than one thousand bhikkhus and one thousand lay
disciples. The Dharma hall was a most helpful addition to the monastery.
   The Buddha and the king often sat together on the bamboo platform while
carrying on conversations. Then Nagasamala built some simple bamboo chairs
to enable the Buddha to receive guests more easily. One day as the Buddha and
the king sat on two of these chairs, the king confided, “I have another son that
you have not yet met. I would like very much for you to meet him and his
mother. He is not the child of Queen Videhi. His mother’s name is Ambapali and
his name is Jivaka. He will soon be sixteen years old. Ambapali lives in Vesali,
north of the city Pataliputta. She does not like the confined life of the palace, and


she is not concerned about titles or prestige. She treasures only her own freedom.
I have provided them with several means of support, including a beautiful
mango grove. Jivaka is a diligent and intelligent boy who is not at all interested
in military or political affairs. He is living near the capital, pursuing medical
studies. I love them deeply and hope you will love them too. O Compassionate
One, if you would agree to meet Jivaka and his mother, I will ask them to come
to Bamboo Forest in the near future.”
The Buddha liked to sit in meditation late into the night, enjoying the moon and
the cool night air.


   The Buddha quietly smiled in agreement. The king joined his palms and
departed, his heart filled with gratitude.
   During that same period, Bamboo Forest Monastery received two very special
guests who had come all the way from Kapilavatthu, the Buddha’s home. They
were the Buddha’s old friend, Kaludayi, and Channa, who had driven the
Buddha’s carriage. Their presence imparted a special warmth to the monastery.
   The Buddha had been absent for more than seven years and he was anxious to
hear news of home. He asked Kaludayi about the king and queen, Yasodhara,
Nanda, Sundari Nanda, his friends, and of course, his son Rahula. Though
Kaludayi was still hale and hearty, his face bore the lines of age. Channa looked
older too. The Buddha spoke with them for a long time as they sat outside his
hut. He learned that Kaludayi now held considerable rank at court and was one
of King Suddhodana’s most trusted advisors. News that the Buddha had attained
the Way and was teaching in Magadha had reached Kapilavatthu two months
previously. Everyone rejoiced at the news, especially the king and queen, and
Gopa. The king, much to Kaludayi’s pleasure, had sent Kaludayi to invite the
Buddha to return home. He took three days to prepare for the journey, unable to
sleep at night for sheer excitement. Yasodhara suggested he take Channa along.
Channa was so happy when Kaludayi agreed that he openly wept. It took the two
men nearly a month to reach Bamboo Forest Monastery.
   According to Kaludayi, the king’s physical health had declined in recent
years, though he was still quite alert mentally. The king had several talented
advisors to help him run the country. Gotami was as robust as ever. Prince Nanda
was now a young man and engaged to a young noblewoman named Kalyani.
Nanda was very handsome and liked to dress in fine clothes, but the king was
concerned that Nanda still lacked a certain stability and maturity. Sundari Nanda,
the Buddha’s sister, was now a beautiful and graceful young woman. As for
Yasodhara, she had given up wearing all jewelry the day the Buddha departed.
She dressed very simply and had sold all her precious possessions in order to
give the money to the poor. When she learned that the Buddha ate no more than
one meal a day, she began to do the same. She had continued her relief work
with the active support of Queen Gotami. Rahula was now a healthy and
handsome boy of seven. His black eyes flashed with intelligence and
determination. His grandparents dearly cherished him, just as they had cherished
Siddhartha as a boy.


   Channa confirmed all that Kaludayi told the Buddha. The Buddha’s heart was
warmed by all the news of home. Finally, Kaludayi asked the Buddha when he
might return to Kapilavatthu. The Buddha said, “I will return after the rainy
season. I do not want to leave the young bhikkhus here until they are more
firmly anchored in their practice. After this period of retreat, I will feel more at
ease about leaving them. But Kaludayi! Channa! Why don’t you remain here
yourselves for a month or so to taste this life? That will still allow you plenty of
time to return to Kapilavatthu and inform the king that I will be back after
monsoon season.”
   Kaludayi and Channa were delighted to remain as guests at Bamboo Forest
Monastery. They made friends with many of the bhikkhus and were able to taste
the joyous and peaceful life of one who leaves home to follow the Way. They
learned how practicing the way of awareness in daily life could nourish the mind
and heart. Kaludayi spent much time at the Buddha’s side and observed him
carefully. He was deeply moved by the Buddha’s wondrous ease. It was clear
that the Buddha had attained a state in which he no longer chased after any
desire. The Buddha was like a fish swimming freely, or a cloud floating
peacefully in the sky. He dwelled completely in the present moment.
   The Buddha’s eyes and smile were evidence of the wonderful liberation his
spirit enjoyed. Nothing in this world bound him, and yet no one else possessed
so great an understanding and love for others as he did. Kaludayi saw that his old
friend had left him far behind on the spiritual path. Suddenly, Kaludayi found
himself longing for the serene, unfettered life of a bhikkhu. He felt ready to
abandon all rank, wealth, and prestige, and all the worries and anxieties that
accompanied such a life. After spending just seven days at Bamboo Forest, he
confided his wish to be ordained as a bhikkhu to the Buddha. The Buddha
looked somewhat surprised, but then he smiled and nodded his head in
acceptance.
   Channa felt the same desire to become a bhikkhu, but, aware of his duty to the
royal family, he reflected that he should not become a bhikkhu without first
asking Yasodhara’s leave. He resolved to wait until the Buddha returned to
Kapilavatthu before making his request.


                            Chapter Thirty-Two
                          The Finger Is Not the Moon
One afternoon Sariputta and Moggallana brought a friend, the ascetic
Dighanakha, to meet the Buddha. Dighanakha was as well-known as Sanjaya.
He also happened to be Sariputta’s uncle. When he learned that his nephew had
become a disciple of the Buddha, he was curious to learn about the Buddha’s
teaching. When he asked Sariputta and Moggallana to explain the teaching to
him, they suggested he meet directly with the Buddha.
   Dighanakha asked the Buddha, “Gautama, what is your teaching? What are
your doctrines? For my own part, I dislike all doctrines and theories. I don’t
subscribe to any at all.”
   The Buddha smiled and asked, “Do you subscribe to your doctrine of not
following any doctrines? Do you believe in your doctrine of not-believing?”
   Somewhat taken aback, Dighanakha replied, “Gautama, whether I believe or
don’t believe is of no importance.”
   The Buddha spoke gently, “Once a person is caught by belief in a doctrine, he
loses all his freedom. When one becomes dogmatic, he believes his doctrine is
the only truth and that all other doctrines are heresy. Disputes and conflicts all
arise from narrow views. They can extend endlessly, wasting precious time and
sometimes even leading to war. Attachment to views is the greatest impediment
to the spiritual path. Bound to narrow views, one becomes so entangled that it is
no longer possible to let the door of truth open.
   “Let me tell you a story about a young widower who lived with his five-year-
old son. He cherished his son more than his own life. One day he left his son at
home while he went out on business. When he was gone, brigands came and
robbed and burned the entire village. They kidnapped his son. When the man
returned home, he found the charred corpse of a young child lying beside his
burned house. He took it to be the body of his own son. He wailed in grief and
cremated what was left of the corpse. Because he loved his son so dearly, he put
the ashes in a bag which he carried with him everywhere he went. Several
months later, his son managed to escape from the brigands and make his way
home. He arrived in the middle of the night and knocked at the door. At that


moment, the father was hugging the bag of ashes and weeping. He refused to
open the door even when the child called out that he was the man’s son. He
believed that his own son was dead and that the child knocking at the door was
some neighborhood child mocking his grief. Finally, his son had no choice but to
wander off on his own. Thus father and son lost each other forever.
   “You see, my friend, if we are attached to some belief and hold it to be the
absolute truth, we may one day find ourselves in a similar situation as the young
widower. Thinking that we already possess the truth, we will be unable to open
our minds to receive the truth, even if truth comes knocking at our door.”
   Dighanakha asked, “But what of your own teaching? If someone follows your
teaching will he become caught in narrow views?”
   “My teaching is not a doctrine or a philosophy. It is not the result of discursive
thought or mental conjecture like various philosophies which contend that the
fundamental essence of the universe is fire, water, earth, wind, or spirit, or that
the universe is either finite or infinite, temporal, or eternal. Mental conjecture
and discursive thought about truth are like ants crawling around the rim of a
bowl—they never get anywhere. My teaching is not a philosophy. It is the result
of direct experience. The things I say come from my own experience. You can
confirm them all by your own experience. I teach that all things are impermanent
and without a separate self. This I have learned from my own direct experience.
You can too. I teach that all things depend on all other things to arise, develop,
and pass away. Nothing is created from a single, original source. I have directly
experienced this truth, and you can also. My goal is not to explain the universe,
but to help guide others to have a direct experience of reality. Words cannot
describe reality. Only direct experience enables us to see the true face of reality.”
   Dighanakha exclaimed, “Wonderful, wonderful, Gautama! But what would
happen if a person did perceive your teaching as a dogma?”
   The Buddha was quiet for a moment and then nodded his head. “Dighanakha,
that is a very good question. My teaching is not a dogma or a doctrine, but no
doubt some people will take it as such. I must state clearly that my teaching is a
method to experience reality and not reality itself, just as a finger pointing at the
moon is not the moon itself. An intelligent person makes use of the finger to see
the moon. A person who only looks at the finger and mistakes it for the moon
will never see the real moon. My teaching is a means of practice, not something
to hold onto or worship. My teaching is like a raft used to cross the river. Only a
fool would carry the raft around after he had already reached the other shore, the
shore of liberation.”


   Dighanakha joined his palms. “Please, Lord Buddha, show me how to be
liberated from painful feelings.”
   The Buddha said, “There are three kinds of feelings—pleasant, unpleasant,
and neutral. All three have roots in the perceptions of mind and body. Feelings
arise and pass away like any other mental or material phenomena. I teach the
method of looking deeply in order to illuminate the nature and source of
feelings, whether they are pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral. When you can see the
source of your feelings, you will understand their nature. You will see that
feelings are impermanent, and gradually you will remain undisturbed by their
arising and passing away. Almost all painful feelings have their source in an
incorrect way of looking at reality. When you uproot erroneous views, suffering
ceases. Erroneous views cause people to consider the impermanent to be
permanent. Ignorance is the source of all suffering. We practice the way of
awareness in order to overcome ignorance. One must look deeply into things in
order to penetrate their true nature. One cannot overcome ignorance through
prayers and offerings.”
   Sariputta, Moggallana, Kaludayi, Nagasamala, and Channa all listened as the
Buddha explained these things to Dighanakha. Sariputta was able to grasp the
meaning of the Buddha’s words the most deeply. He felt his own mind shine like
a bright sun. Unable to conceal his joy, he joined his palms and prostrated
himself before the Buddha. Moggallana prostrated himself, as well. Then
Dighanakha, moved and profoundly impressed by all that the Buddha had said,
also prostrated himself before the Buddha. Kaludayi and Channa were deeply
touched by this scene. They felt proud to be associated with the Buddha, and
their faith and trust in his Way was further strengthened.
   A few days after that, Queen Videhi and an attendant visited and made food
offerings to the sangha. She also brought a young plumeria sapling and planted it
beside the Buddha’s hut in remembrance of the story he had told the children in
the palace courtyard.
   Under the Buddha’s guidance, the community made ever greater progress
along the path. Sariputta and Moggallana were like shining stars with their keen
intelligence, diligence, and leadership abilities. They worked with Kondanna and
Kassapa to organize and guide the sangha. However, even as the sangha’s
reputation was growing, some people began to speak ill of the Buddha and his
community. Some of these rumors were spread by members of religious factions
who were jealous of the king’s support for the sangha. Lay disciples who often
visited Bamboo Forest expressed concern over what was being said. Apparently,


some people in Rajagaha were distressed that so many young men from wealthy
and noble families had become bhikkhus. They feared that soon all the young
men would abandon their homes and there would be no more suitable husbands
for the noble young women in Rajagaha. Entire family lines could be
discontinued, they warned.
   Many bhikkhus were not pleased when they heard these things. But when the
Buddha was informed, he calmed both the laity and the bhikkhus by saying,
“Don’t worry about such things. Sooner or later, all such talk will die down.”
And it did. In less than a month, there was no more talk about such trifling fears.


                         Chapter Thirty-Three
                        Beauty That Does Not Fade
Two weeks before the rainy retreat ended, a woman of uncommon beauty paid a
visit to the Buddha. She arrived in a white carriage pulled by two white horses,
and was accompanied by a youth who appeared to be about sixteen years old.
Her manner of dress and her bearing were refined and elegant. She asked a
young bhikkhu to show her the way to the Buddha’s hut, but when they arrived
there, the Buddha had not yet returned from his walking meditation. The
bhikkhu invited the woman and the boy to sit on bamboo chairs in front of the
hut.
   Shortly afterwards the Buddha returned, accompanied by Kaludayi, Sariputta,
and Nagasamala. The woman and youth stood and bowed respectfully. The
Buddha invited them to sit again as he sat down on a third bamboo chair. He
understood that this woman was Ambapali and that the youth was King
Bimbisara’s son, Jivaka.
   Kaludayi had never seen a woman more beautiful in all his life. He had only
taken vows as a bhikkhu a month earlier, and he was confused as to whether or
not it was proper for a bhikkhu to look at a beautiful woman. Unsure of what to
do, he lowered his eyes to the ground. Nagasamala reacted in the same way.
Only the Buddha and Sariputta looked directly into the woman’s eyes.
   Sariputta looked at Ambapali and then at the Buddha. He saw how natural and
relaxed the Buddha’s gaze was. His face was as serene as a beautiful full moon.
The Buddha’s eyes were kind and clear. Sariputta felt as though the Buddha’s
contentment, ease, and joy penetrated Sariputta’s own heart in that instant.
   Ambapali looked directly into the Buddha’s eyes as well. No one had ever
looked at her in the way the Buddha was looking at her now. As long as she
could remember, men had gazed at her with either embarrassment or desire in
their eyes. But the Buddha looked at her as he might look at a cloud, a river, or a
flower. She had the impression that he could see deeply into her heart’s thoughts.
She joined her palms and introduced herself and her son. “I am Ambapali, and
this is my son, Jivaka, who is studying to become a doctor. We have heard much
about you, and we have both looked forward to this moment.”


   The Buddha asked Jivaka about his studies and daily life. Jivaka answered
politely. The Buddha could see that he was a kind-hearted and intelligent boy.
Though he shared the same father as Prince Ajatasattu, it was evident he
possessed a character of greater depth than the young prince. Jivaka’s heart filled
with respect and affection for the Buddha. He told himself that when he finished
his medical studies, he would settle near the Buddha at Bamboo Forest.
   Before she met him, Ambapali had assumed the Buddha would be like so
many other famous teachers she had met. But she had never before met anyone
like the Buddha. His gaze was unspeakably tender and kind. She felt as though
he could understand all the sufferings locked inside her heart. Much of her pain
was soothed just by the way he looked at her. Tears glistened on her eyelashes as
she said, “Teacher, my life has been filled with suffering. Though I have never
lacked for money or possessions, I have not felt anything to aspire to until now.
Today is the happiest day of my life.”
   Ambapali was an accomplished singer and dancer, but she would not perform
for just anyone. If someone’s manner or behavior displeased her, she refused to
perform no matter how much gold they might offer. When she was sixteen years
old, she became involved in a love affair that ended in heart-break. Soon
afterwards she met the young Prince Bimbisara, and they fell in love. She gave
birth to their son, Jivaka. But no one in the palace wanted to accept Ambapali
and her son. Some members of the palace household even spread rumors that
Jivaka was no more than an abandoned orphan that the prince had rescued from
a barrel by the side of the road. Ambapali was hurt by these accusations. She
endured humiliation caused by the jealousy and hatred of others in the palace.
Soon she saw that her freedom was the only thing worth guarding. She refused
to live in the palace and vowed that she would never relinquish her personal
freedom to anyone.
Ambapali had the impression that the Buddha could see deeply into her heart’s
thoughts.


   The Buddha spoke gently to her, “Beauty arises and passes away like all other
phenomena. Fame and fortune are no different. Only the peace, joy, and freedom
that are the fruits of meditation bring true happiness. Ambapali, cherish and take
good care of all the moments left to you in this life. Do not lose yourself in
forgetfulness or idle amusements. This is of utmost importance.”
   The Buddha told Ambapali how she could arrange her daily life in a new way
—breathing, sitting, and working in a spirit of mindfulness, and observing and
practicing the five precepts. She was overjoyed to receive these precious
teachings. Before departing, she said, “Just outside the city of Vesali, I own a
mango grove that is both cool and peaceful. I hope that you and your bhikkhus
might consider coming there for a visit. That would be a great honor to me and
to my son. Please, Lord Buddha, consider my invitation.”
   The Buddha smiled his acceptance.
   After Ambapali departed, Kaludayi asked permission to sit down beside the


Buddha. Nagasamala invited Sariputta to sit on the other chair while he
remained standing. A number of other bhikkhus passing by the hut, paused and
joined the gathering. Sariputta looked at Kaludayi and smiled. He looked at
Nagasamala and smiled too. Then he asked the Buddha, “Master, how should a
monk regard a woman’s beauty? Is beauty, especially that of a woman, an
obstacle to spiritual practice?”
   The Buddha smiled. He knew that Sariputta was not asking the question for
himself but on behalf of the other bhikkhus. He answered, “Bhikkhus, the true
nature of all dharmas transcends beauty and ugliness. Beauty and ugliness are
only concepts created by our minds. They are inseparably entwined with the
structure of the five aggregates. To the eyes of an artist, anything can appear
beautiful and anything can be rendered as ugly. A river, a cloud, a leaf, a flower,
a ray of sunshine, or a golden afternoon all possess beauty. The golden bamboo
growing nearby us is beautiful. But perhaps no beauty has more capacity to
distract a man’s concentration than a woman’s beauty. If one is obsessed with a
woman’s beauty, he can lose his way.
   “Bhikkhus, when you have seen deeply and have attained the Way, the
beautiful may still appear beautiful and the ugly may still appear ugly, but
because you have attained liberation, you are not bound by either. When a
liberated person looks at beauty, he can see that it is composed of many non-
beautiful elements. Such a person understands the impermanent and empty
nature of all things, including beauty and ugliness. Thus he is neither
mesmerized by beauty nor repulsed by ugliness.
   “The only kind of beauty that does not fade and that does not cause suffering
is a compassionate and liberated heart. Compassion is the ability to love
unconditionally, demanding nothing in return. A liberated heart is unbound by
conditions. A compassionate and liberated heart is true beauty. The peace and
joy of that beauty is true peace and joy. Bhikkhus, practice diligently and you
will realize true beauty.”
   Kaludayi and the other bhikkhus found the Buddha’s words most helpful.
   The rainy retreat came to a close. The Buddha summoned Kaludayi and
Channa and suggested they leave for Kapilavatthu first in order to announce the
Buddha’s imminent arrival. Kaludayi and Channa made preparations for their
trip without delay. Kaludayi, now a bhikkhu of calm and serene bearing, knew
that everyone in the capital would be surprised when they saw him. He looked
forward to the happy task of announcing the Buddha’s return, but he regretted
leaving Bamboo Forest after so brief a stay.


                          Chapter Thirty-Four
                                    Reunion
Kaludayi told the king, queen, and Yasodhara the news of the Buddha’s
imminent arrival, and then, taking just his begging bowl, set off alone to meet
the Buddha on his way to Kapilavatthu. Kaludayi walked with the serene, slow
steps of a bhikkhu. He walked days and rested nights, pausing only briefly in
tiny hamlets along the way to beg for food. Wherever he went, he announced
that Prince Siddhartha had found the Way and was about to return home. Nine
days after he left Kapilavatthu, Kaludayi met the Buddha and three hundred
bhikkhus traveling with him. Moggallana, Kondanna, and the Kassapa brothers
had remained with the other bhikkhus in Bamboo Forest.
   At Kaludayi’s suggestion, the Buddha and his bhikkhus rested the night in
Nigrodha Park, three miles south of Kapilavatthu. The following morning they
entered the city to beg.
   The sight of three hundred bhikkhus wearing saffron robes, peacefully and
silently holding their bowls to beg, made a deep impression on the city’s people.
It did not take long for news of their arrival to reach the palace. King
Suddhodana ordered a carriage be readied at once to take him out to meet his
son. Queen Maha Prajapati and Yasodhara waited anxiously within the palace.
   When the king’s carriage entered the eastern sector of the city, they
encountered the bhikkhus. The carriage driver recognized Siddhartha first. “Your
majesty, there he is! He walks ahead of the others and his robe is a bit longer.”
   Astonished, the king recognized that the bhikkhu clad in a saffron robe was
indeed his own son. The Buddha radiated majesty and seemed almost
surrounded by a halo of light. He was standing holding his bowl in front of a
shabby dwelling. In his serene concentration, it appeared that the act of begging
was at that moment the most important thing in his life. The king watched as a
woman dressed in tattered clothes came out of the poor hut and placed a small
potato in the Buddha’s bowl. The Buddha respectfully received it by bowing to
the woman. He then moved on to the next house.
   The king’s carriage was still some distance from where the Buddha stood. The
king asked his driver to halt. He stepped out of the carriage and walked towards


the Buddha. Just then, the Buddha saw his father approaching. They walked
towards each other, the king with hurried steps, the Buddha with calm, relaxed
steps.
   “Siddhartha!”
   “Father!”
   Nagasamala came up to the Buddha and took his teacher’s bowl, enabling the
Buddha to hold the king’s hands in his own two hands. Tears streamed down the
king’s wrinkled cheeks. The Buddha gazed at his father, his eyes filled with
loving warmth. The king understood that Siddhartha was no longer the crown
prince, but a respected spiritual teacher. He wanted to embrace Siddhartha but
felt that might not be proper. Instead he joined his palms and bowed to his son in
the manner a king greets a high-ranking spiritual teacher.
   The Buddha turned to Sariputta who was nearby and said, “The bhikkhus have
completed their begging. Please lead them back to Nigrodha Park. Nagasamala
will accompany me to the palace where we can eat our food. We will return to
the sangha later in the afternoon.”
   Sariputta bowed and then turned to lead the others back to the park.
   The king looked long and hard at the Buddha before saying, “I thought surely
you would come to the palace to see your family first. Who could have guessed
you would instead go begging in the city? Why didn’t you come to eat at the
palace?”
   The Buddha smiled at his father. “Father, I am not alone. I have traveled with
a large community, the community of bhikkhus. I, too, am a bhikkhu, and like all
other bhikkhus, beg for my food.”
   “But must you beg for food at such poor dwellings as these around here? No
one in the history of the Sakya clan has ever done such a thing.”
   Again the Buddha smiled. “Perhaps no Sakya has ever done so before, but all
bhikkhus have. Father, begging is a spiritual practice which helps a bhikkhu
develop humility and see that all persons are equal. When I receive a small
potato from a poor family, it is no different than when I receive an elegant dish
served by a king. A bhikkhu can transcend barriers that discriminate between
rich and poor. On my path, all are considered equal. Everyone, no matter how
poor he is, can attain liberation and enlightenment. Begging does not demean my
own dignity. It recognizes the inherent dignity of all persons.”
   King Suddhodana listened with his mouth slightly agape. The old prophecies
were true. Siddhartha had become a spiritual teacher whose virtue would shine
throughout the world. Holding the king’s hand, the Buddha walked with him


back to the palace. Nagasamala followed them.
  Thanks to a palace attendant who spotted the bhikkhus and called out, Queen
Gotami, Yasodhara, Sundari Nanda, and young Rahula were able to watch the
encounter between the king and the Buddha from a palace balcony. They saw
how the king bowed to the Buddha. As the king and the Buddha neared the
palace, Yasodhara turned to Rahula. She pointed to the Buddha and said, “Dear
son, do you see that monk holding your grandfather’s hand, about to enter the
palace gates?”
Yasodhara told Rahula, “Dear son, that monk is your own father.”


  Rahula nodded.
  “That monk is your own father. Run down and greet him. He has a very
special inheritance to pass on to you. Ask him about it.”
  Rahula ran downstairs. In a flash he reached the palace courtyard. He ran
towards the Buddha. The Buddha knew at once that the little boy running
towards him was Rahula. He opened his arms wide and embraced his son.
Almost out of breath, Rahula gasped, “Respected monk, mother said I should
ask you about my special inheritance. What is it? Can you show it to me?”
  The Buddha patted Rahula’s cheek and smiled.“You want to know about your
inheritance? All in good time, I will pass it on to you.”
  The Buddha took the boy’s hand in his, while still holding the king’s hand.
Together the three of them entered the palace. Queen Gotami, Yasodhara, and
Sundari Nanda came downstairs and saw the king, the Buddha, and Rahula
entering the royal gardens. The spring sunshine was pleasantly warm. Flowers
blossomed everywhere and birds warbled sweet songs. The Buddha sat down
with the king and Rahula on a marble bench. He invited Nagasamala to be seated
too. At that moment, Queen Gotami, Yasodhara, and Sundari Nanda entered the
gardens.
  The Buddha immediately stood up and walked towards the three women.
Queen Gotami was a picture of good health. She wore a sari the color of cool
green bamboo. Gopa was as beautiful as ever, although she appeared somewhat
pale. Her sari was as white as fresh-fallen snow. She wore no jewels or
ornaments. The Buddha’s younger sister, now sixteen years old, wore a gold sari
which set off her shining black eyes. The women joined their palms and bowed
low to greet the Buddha. The Buddha joined his palms and bowed in return.
Then he called out, “Mother! Gopa!”
  Hearing his voice call out their names, both women began to weep.
  The Buddha took the queen’s hand and led her to sit down on a bench. He
asked, “And where is my brother, Nanda?”
  The queen answered, “He is out practicing martial arts. He should return soon.
Do you recognize your younger sister? She has grown much in your absence,
wouldn’t you say?”
  The Buddha gazed at his sister. He had not seen her in more than seven years.
“Sundari Nanda, you’re a young woman now!”
  Then the Buddha approached Yasodhara and gently took her hand. She was so


moved, her hand trembled in his. He led her to sit beside Queen Gotami, and
then he sat back on his own bench. On the walk back to the palace, the king had
asked the Buddha many questions, but now no one spoke, not even Rahula. The
Buddha looked at the king and queen, Yasodhara, and Sundari Nanda. The joy of
reunion shone in everyone’s face. After a long silence, the Buddha spoke,
“Father, I have returned. Mother, I have returned. See, Gopa, I came back to
you.”
   Again the two women began to cry. Their tears were tears of joy. The Buddha
let them silently weep, and then he asked Rahula to sit beside him. He patted the
boy’s hair affectionately.
   Gotami wiped her tears with the edge of her sari, and, smiling at the Buddha,
said, “You were gone a very long time. More than seven years have passed. Do
you understand how courageous a woman Gopa has been?”
   “I have long understood the depth of her courage, Mother. You and Yasodhara
are the two most courageous women I know. Not only have you offered
understanding and support to your husbands, but you are models of strength and
determination for all. I have been very lucky to have both of you in my life. It
has made my task much easier.”
   Yasodhara smiled but she did not speak.
   The king said, “You have told me a bit about your search for the Way up to
your ordeals of self-mortification. Could you repeat all you have told me for the
others to hear and then continue?”
   The Buddha told them about his long search for the Way in brief. He told
them about meeting King Bimbisara on the mountain, and about the poor
children of Uruvela village. He told them about his five friends who had
practiced austerities with him, and about the great reception the bhikkhus
received in Rajagaha. Everyone listened intently. Not even Rahula budged.
   The Buddha’s voice was warm and affectionate. He did not dwell on details
and he spoke only sparingly of his period of self-mortification. He used his
words to sow helpful seeds of awakening in the hearts of those closest to him.
   An attendant came out to the garden and whispered something in Gotami’s
ear. The queen whispered something back. Soon after, the attendant prepared a
table in the garden for the noon meal. Just as the food was being placed upon the
table, Nanda arrived. The Buddha greeted him joyfully.
   “Nanda! When I left you were only fifteen. Now you’re a grown man!”
   Nanda smiled. The queen chastised him, “Nanda, greet your elder brother
properly. He is a monk now. Join your palms and bow.”


   Nanda bowed and the Buddha bowed to his younger brother in return.
   They all moved to the table. The Buddha asked Nagasamala to sit beside him.
A serving maid brought out water for everyone to wash their hands.
   The king asked the Buddha, “What did you receive in your begging bowl?”
   “I received a potato, but I notice that Nagasamala did not yet receive
anything.”
   King Suddhodana stood up. “Please allow me to offer both of you food from
our table.” Yasodhara held the platters while the king served the two bhikkhus.
He placed fragrant white rice and vegetable curry into their bowls. The Buddha
and Nagasamala ate in silent mindfulness and the others followed their example.
Birds continued to sing throughout the garden.
   When they had finished eating, the queen invited the king and the Buddha to
sit again on the marble benches. A servant brought out a platter of tangerines, but
Rahula was the only one to eat his. Everyone else was too absorbed in listening
to the Buddha recount his experiences. Queen Gotami asked more questions than
anyone else. When the king heard about the hut the Buddha lived in at Bamboo
Forest, he resolved to have a similar one built at Nigrodha Park for him. He
expressed his hope that the Buddha would remain for several months in order to
teach them the Way. Queen Gotami, Yasodhara, Nanda, and Sundari Nanda
voiced their joyous approval of the king’s suggestion.
   At last the Buddha said it was time for him to return to his bhikkhus in the
park. The king rose and said, “I would like to invite you and all the bhikkhus for
a meal offering just as the king of Magadha did. I will invite all the royal family
and members of the government at the same time so that they can hear you speak
about the Way.”
   The Buddha said he would be glad to accept the invitation. They arranged for
the gathering to take place in seven days. Yasodhara expressed a desire to invite
the Buddha and Kaludayi for a private meal in the eastern palace. The Buddha
accepted her invitation, as well, but suggested it would be best to wait until a
few days after the king’s reception.
   The king wanted to order a carriage to take the Buddha and Nagasamala back
to Nigrodha Park, but the Buddha refused. He explained that he preferred to
travel by foot. The entire family accompanied the two bhikkhus to the palace’s
outer gates. They all joined their palms respectfully and bid the two bhikkhus
farewell.


                           Chapter Thirty-Five
                          Early Morning Sunshine
News of Siddhartha’s return spread quickly throughout the rest of Kapilavatthu,
confirmed by the serene presence of the bhikkhus begging every morning in the
city. Many families made food offerings and were eager to hear the bhikkhus
speak about the teaching.
   King Suddhodana asked the people to decorate the city streets with banners
and flowers in preparation for the day the Buddha and the bhikkhus were invited
to eat at the palace. He also lost no time in having small huts built in Nigrodha
Park for the Buddha and his senior students. Many people came to the Park to
meet with the Buddha and his bhikkhus. The people were impressed to see the
former prince calmly begging in the city. The Buddha’s return became the main
topic of conversation among all the townspeople.
   Gotami and Yasodhara wanted to visit the Buddha at Nigrodha Park, but they
were too busy that first week preparing for the reception of the sangha. The king
wanted to invite several thousand guests, including all the members of the
government, as well as all those in the city who held other political, cultural, and
religious positions. He ordered that all dishes for the meal be vegetarian.
   Prince Nanda, however, did find the time to visit the Buddha twice that week.
He listened as the Buddha explained the Path of Awakening to him. Nanda loved
and respected his elder brother, and he felt himself being drawn to the peaceful
life of a bhikkhu. He even asked the Buddha whether or not he thought he would
make a good bhikkhu, but the Buddha only smiled. He could see that although
Nanda was a young man of admirable feelings and good intentions, he did not
yet possess a strong sense of purpose or commitment. When he sat with the
Buddha, Nanda wanted to become a monk, but when he returned to the palace,
he had eyes and thoughts only for his lovely fiancée, Kalyani. Nanda wondered
what the Buddha thought about his equivocation.
   The day for the reception arrived. The entire city, including the royal palace,
was decked with banners and flowers to welcome the Buddha and his sangha.
The city bustled with excitement as the entire population formally welcomed
home their heroic countryman. Musicians played beautifully as crowds lined the


streets. Everyone strained to catch a glimpse of the Buddha. Gotami and
Yasodhara personally welcomed all the guests that had been invited by the king.
Gopa had even given in to the queen’s wishes that she dress in an elegant sari
and wear jewels in honor of the occasion.
   The Buddha and the bhikkhus walked with slow, calm steps between the
crowds. Many people joined their palms and bowed as the Buddha passed.
Children were lifted onto their parents’ shoulders so they could see. Happy
shouts and applause rose from the crowds. The bhikkhus continued to follow
their breath mindfully in the midst of the bustling, festive atmosphere.
   King Suddhodana greeted the Buddha and his sangha at the outer gates of the
palace. He led them to the inner courtyard. All the guests followed the king’s
example in joining their palms and bowing deeply to the Buddha, even though
some of them wondered why it was necessary to show such great respect to a
monk so young, even if he was the former prince.
   After the Buddha and the bhikkhus were seated, the king motioned to the
servants to bring out the food. He himself served the Buddha. Yasodhara and
Gotami directed the serving of all the other guests, which included brahmans,
ascetics, and hermits. Everyone ate in silence, following the example of the
Buddha and his bhikkhus. When all the bhikkhus and all the guests were finished
eating and the bhikkhus’ bowls had been washed and returned, the king stood
and joined his palms. He invited the Buddha to teach the Dharma to all those
gathered.
   The Buddha sat quietly for a moment in order to gain a sense of those present.
He began by briefly recounting his experiences in seeking the Way, as he knew
the people were anxious to hear what had happened to him in the past seven
years. He spoke to them about the nature of impermanence, the absence of a
separate self, and the law of dependent co-arising. He said that practicing
awareness in daily life and looking deeply into things led to the cessation of
suffering and the realization of peace and joy. He said that offerings and prayers
were not effective means to attain liberation.
   The Buddha taught the Four Noble Truths: the existence of suffering, the
causes of suffering, the cessation of suffering, and the path that leads to the
cessation of suffering. He said, “In addition to the sufferings of birth, old age,
sickness, and death, human beings endure other sufferings which they
themselves create. Out of ignorance and false views, people say and do things
that create suffering for themselves and others. Anger, hatred, suspicion,
jealousy, and frustration cause suffering. All these arise from lack of awareness.


People are caught in their suffering as if they were caught in a house on fire, and
most of our suffering we create ourselves. You cannot find freedom by praying
to some god. You must look deeply into your own mind and situation in order to
uproot the false views which are the root of suffering. You must find the source
of your suffering in order to understand the nature of suffering. Once you
understand the nature of suffering, it can no longer bind you.
   “If someone is angry at you, you can get angry back at him, but that only
creates more suffering. If you follow the Way of Awareness, you will not react
with anger. Instead, you will quiet your mind in order to discover why that
person is angry at you. By looking deeply, you can uncover the causes that led to
the person’s anger. If you see that you bear responsibility for angering the
person, you will not become angry, but you will accept that your own
misconduct has contributed towards creating his anger. If you are without blame,
you can try to see why the person has misunderstood you. Then you can find a
way to help him understand your true intentions. In this way, you will avoid
causing more suffering to both yourself and the other person.
   “Your majesty and honored guests! All suffering can be overcome by looking
deeply into things. On the Path of Awareness, we learn to follow our breath to
maintain mindfulness. We follow the precepts in order to build concentration and
attain understanding. The precepts are principles of living which foster peace
and joy. Practicing the precepts, our ability to concentrate develops, and we are
able to live with greater awareness and mindfulness. Mindfulness nurtures the
capacity to illuminate the true nature of our mind and our environment. With that
illumination comes understanding.
   “Only with understanding can we love. All suffering is overcome when we
attain understanding. The path of true liberation is the path of understanding.
Understanding is prajña. Such understanding can only come from looking
deeply into the true nature of things. The path of precepts, concentration, and
understanding is the path which leads to liberation.”
   The Buddha paused for a moment and then smiled before continuing to speak.
“But suffering is only one face of life. Life has another face, the face of wonder.
If we can see that face of life, we will have happiness, peace, and joy. When our
hearts are unfettered, we can make direct contact with the wonders of life. When
we have truly grasped the truths of impermanence, emptiness of self, and
dependent co-arising, we see how wondrous our own hearts and minds are. We
see how wonderful our bodies, the branches of violet bamboo, the golden
chrysanthemums, the clear stream, and the radiant moon are.


   “Because we imprison ourselves in our suffering, we lose the ability to
experience the wonders of life. When we can break through ignorance, we
discover the vast realm of peace, joy, liberation, and nirvana. Nirvana is the
uprooting of ignorance, greed, and anger. It is the appearance of peace, joy, and
freedom. Honored guests, take time to look at a clear stream or a ray of early
morning sunshine. Can you experience peace, joy, and freedom? If you are still
locked in the prison of sorrow and anxiety, you will be unable to experience the
wonders of the universe which include your own breath, body, and mind. The
path I have discovered leads to transcending sorrow and anxiety by looking
deeply into their true nature. I have shared this path with many others and they,
too, have succeeded in discovering it for themselves.”
   Everyone was deeply touched by the Buddha’s Dharma talk. The king’s heart
welled with happiness as did Queen Gotami’s and Yasodhara’s. They all wanted
to learn more about the methods of looking deeply into the nature of things in
order to attain liberation and enlightenment. After the Dharma talk, the king
escorted the Buddha and the bhikkhus to the outer gates. The guests all
congratulated the king on his son’s great attainment.
   Nigrodha Park was soon transformed into a monastery. The ancient fig trees
that grew there provided cool shade. Many new bhikkhus were ordained, and
many laypersons, including a number of young people of the Sakya clan, took
the five precepts.
   Yasodhara made frequent visits to the Buddha at Nigrodha Park, accompanied
by the queen and young Rahula. She listened to his Dharma talks and in private
asked him about the relation between practicing the Way and performing social
service. The Buddha showed her how to observe her breath and practice
meditation in order to nourish peace and joy in her own heart. She understood
that without peace and joy, she could not truly help others. She learned that by
developing deeper understanding, she could deepen her capacity to love. She
was happy to discover that she could practice the way of awareness in the very
midst of her efforts to serve others. Peace and joy were possible right in the very
moments she was working. Means and ends were not two different things.
   Queen Gotami was also making great progress in the practice.


                             Chapter Thirty-Six
                                     Lotus Vow
Princess Yasodhara invited the Buddha, Kaludayi, Nagasamala, and the queen to
share a meal in her palace. After they finished eating, she invited them to
accompany her to a poor hamlet where she worked with children. Rahula joined
them also. Yasodhara led them to the old rose-apple tree where the Buddha had
his first experience of meditation as a young child. The Buddha marvelled how it
seemed like only yesterday when in fact twenty-seven years had passed. The tree
had grown much bigger over the years.
   At Yasodhara’s request, many poor children gathered by the tree. Yasodhara
told the Buddha that the children he had met there so many years ago were now
married with families of their own. The children beneath the tree were between
the ages of seven and twelve. When they saw the Buddha arrive, they stopped
playing and formed two rows for the Buddha to walk between. Yasodhara had
showed them beforehand how to greet the Buddha. They placed a special
bamboo chair beneath the tree for the Buddha and spread a mat for Gotami,
Yasodhara, and the two bhikkhus to sit upon.
   The Buddha felt happy to sit there. He thought about the days he had spent
with the poor children of Uruvela village. He told the children about the buffalo
boy, Svasti, and the young girl, Sujata, who gave him milk. He spoke about
nourishing a heart of love by deepening one’s understanding, and he told them
the story about rescuing the swan after his cousin had shot it down. The children
listened to all he said with great interest.
   The Buddha motioned Rahula to sit down in front of him. Then he told all the
children a past life story.
   “Long ago, at the foot of the Himalayas, lived a young man named Megha. He
was kind and industrious. Though he was without money, he confidently set out
for the capital where he hoped to study. He took no more than his walking stick,
a hat, a water jug, the clothes he was wearing, and a coat. Along the way, he
stopped and worked on farms for rice and sometimes money. By the time he
reached the capital of Divapati, he had accumulated five hundred rupees.
   “When he entered the city, the people seemed to be preparing for an important


celebration. Wondering what the occasion was, he looked around for someone to
ask. At that moment, a beautiful young woman walked by him. She was holding
a bouquet of half-opened lotus flowers.
   “Megha asked her, ‘What is the celebration today?’
   “The young woman answered, ‘You must be a stranger to Divapati or you
would surely know that today the enlightened Master Dipankara is arriving. He
is said to be like a torch lighting the path for all beings. He is the son of King
Arcimat who left in search of the True Path and has found it. His path brightens
all the world and so the people have organized this celebration in honor of him.’
   “Megha was overjoyed to hear about the presence of an enlightened teacher.
He wanted very much to offer something to the teacher and request to become
his student. He asked the young woman, ‘How much did you pay for those lotus
flowers?’
   “She looked at Megha and could easily see he was a bright and considerate
young man. She answered, ‘I only paid for five. The other two I picked from the
pond at my own house.’
   “Megha asked, ‘How much did you pay for the five?’
   “‘Five hundred rupees.’
   “Megha asked to buy the five lotuses for his five hundred rupees in order to
offer the flowers to Dipankara. But the woman refused, saying, ‘I bought these
to offer to him myself. I had no intention of selling them to someone else.’
   “Megha tried to persuade her. ‘But you can still offer the two you picked from
your own pond. Please let me buy the other five. I want to offer something to the
Master. It is a rare and precious opportunity to encounter such a teacher in this
life. I want to meet him and even ask to become his student. If you agree to let
me buy your five lotus flowers, I will be grateful to you for the rest of my life.’
   “The woman looked at the ground and did not answer.
   “Megha implored her. ‘If you let me buy those five flowers, I will do anything
you ask.’
   “The young woman appeared embarrassed. She did not lift her eyes from the
ground for a long moment. Finally, she said, ‘I do not know what connection we
have shared in a past life, but I fell in love with you the moment I saw you. I
have met many young men, but my heart has never trembled in this way before.
I will give you these flowers to offer to the Enlightened One, but only if you
promise me that in this life and all our future lives, I may be your wife.’
   “She said these words hurriedly and was almost out of breath when she
finished. Megha did not know what to say. After a moment of silence, he said,


‘You are very special and most honest. When I saw you, I also felt something
special inside. But I am seeking the path of liberation. If I married, I would not
be free to follow the path when the right opportunity presented itself.’
   “The young woman answered, ‘Promise that I will be your wife and I vow
that when the time comes for you to seek your path, I will not prevent you from
going. On the contrary, I will do everything I can to help you fully achieve your
quest.’
   “Megha happily accepted her proposal, and together they went to find Master
Dipankara. The crowds were so dense that they could barely see him up ahead.
But even just catching a glimpse of his face was enough for Megha to know that
he was a truly enlightened one. Megha felt a great joy and vowed that he, too,
would one day attain such enlightenment. He wanted to get closer to be able to
offer Dipankara the flowers, but it was impossible to move through the throngs
of people. Not knowing what else to do, he tossed his flowers into the air in the
direction of Dipankara. Miraculously, they landed right in the arms of the
Master. Megha was ecstatic to see how the sincerity of his heart had made itself
known. The young woman asked Megha to throw her flowers to the Master, too.
Her two flowers also landed in the Master’s arms. Dipankara called out, asking
the persons who had offered the lotus flowers to present themselves. The crowds
parted for Megha and the young woman to pass. Megha clasped the young
woman’s hand. Together they bowed before Dipankara. The Master looked at
Megha and said, ‘I understand the sincerity of your heart. I can see you have
great resolve to follow the spiritual path to attain total enlightenment and to save
all beings. Take comfort. One day in a future life, you will attain your vow.’
Megha asked the beautiful, young woman if he could buy her five lotuses to offer
to Master Dipankara.


   “Then Dipankara looked at the young woman kneeling by Megha’s side, and
he spoke to her. ‘You shall be Megha’s closest friend in this life and in many
lives to come. Remember to keep your promise. You will help your husband to
realize his vow.’
   “Megha and the young woman were deeply moved by the Master’s words.
They devoted themselves to studying the path of liberation taught by the
Enlightened One, Dipankara.
   “Children, in that life and in many lives thereafter, Megha and the young
woman lived as husband and wife. When the husband needed to leave in order to
pursue his spiritual path, his wife helped him in every way she could. She never
tried to prevent him. Because of that, he felt the deepest gratitude towards her.
At last, he realized his great vow and became a truly enlightened one himself,
just as Dipankara had predicted so many lifetimes ago.
   “Children, money and fame are not the most precious things in life. Money


and fame can fade very quickly. Understanding and love are the most precious
things in life. If you have understanding and love, you will know happiness.
Megha and his wife shared happiness for many lives, thanks to their
understanding and love. With understanding and love, there is nothing you
cannot accomplish.”
   Yasodhara joined her palms and bowed to the Buddha. She was moved to
tears. She knew that although he told the story to the children, he meant it
especially for her. It was his way of thanking her. Queen Prajapati looked at her.
She too understood why the Buddha had recounted this story. She placed her
hand on her daughter-in-law’s shoulder and said to the children, “Do you know
who Megha is in this life? He is the Buddha. In this very life he has become an
enlightened one. And do you know who Megha’s wife is in this life? She is none
other than your own Yasodhara. Thanks to her understanding, Prince Siddhartha
was able to follow his path and attain awakening. We should offer thanks to
Yasodhara.”
   The children had long loved Yasodhara. They now turned towards her and
bowed to her to express all the love in their hearts. The Buddha was deeply
touched. Then he stood up and walked slowly back to the monastery with the
bhikkhus Kaludayi and Nagasamala.


                          Chapter Thirty-Seven
                                  A New Faith
Two weeks later, King Suddhodana invited the Buddha to a private family meal
at the palace. Sariputta was also invited. Queen Gotami, Yasodhara, Nanda,
Sundari Nanda, and Rahula were all present. In the close-knit atmosphere of his
family, the Buddha showed them how to follow their breath, how to look deeply
into their feelings, and how to do walking and sitting meditation. He emphasized
how they could transcend the worries, frustrations, and irritations of daily life by
practicing mindfulness in daily life.
   Rahula sat next to Sariputta and placed his small hand in the elder monk’s
hand. Rahula was very fond of Sariputta.
   When the time came for the Buddha and Sariputta to return to the monastery,
everyone walked with them to the gate. Nanda held the Buddha’s bowl as the
Buddha joined his palms and bowed farewell to each person. To Nanda’s
surprise, the Buddha did not take his bowl back. Not knowing what to do, Nanda
followed the Buddha back to the monastery waiting for the right moment to
return the bowl. When they arrived at the monastery, the Buddha asked Nanda if
he would like to spend a week at the monastery to enjoy a deeper taste of the life
of a bhikkhu. Nanda loved and respected his elder brother, and so he agreed. It
was also true that Nanda felt drawn to the calm and relaxed life of the bhikkhus
he saw around him. When the Buddha asked him at the end of the week if he
would like to be ordained and live a bhikkhu’s life for several months under the
Buddha’s guidance, Nanda was most willing. The Buddha asked Sariputta to
give Nanda basic instruction and to ordain him as a bhikkhu.
   The Buddha had first consulted with his father, the king, about allowing
Nanda to live as a bhikkhu for a period of time. The king agreed with the
Buddha that while Nanda was a well-meaning young man, he lacked the strength
of character and determination required of a future king. The Buddha said he
could provide Nanda with training that would help Nanda build clarity and
resolve. The king was in agreement.
   Less than a month passed, however, when Nanda began to pine away for his
fiancée, the beautiful Janapada Kalyani. He tried to conceal his longing, but the


Buddha saw clearly into his feelings. One day the Buddha said to Nanda, “If you
want to realize your goal, you must first overcome clinging to ordinary
emotions. Devote your whole self to your practice and train your mind. Only
then can you become an effective leader who can serve others well.”
   The Buddha also asked Sariputta to see that Nanda was no longer sent to do
his begging in Kalyani’s neighborhood. When Nanda learned of this, he felt a
mixture of both resentment and gratitude to the Buddha. He understood that the
Buddha could see into his deepest thoughts and needs.
   Rahula envied his young uncle for being able to live at the monastery. He
wanted to be allowed to do the same. But when he asked his mother, she patted
his head and said that he must first grow much bigger before he could become a
monk. Rahula asked how he could grow faster. She told him to eat well and
exercise each day.
   One day when she saw the bhikkhus begging close to the palace, Yasodhara
turned to Rahula and said, “Why don’t you run down and greet the Buddha? Ask
him again about your inheritance.”
   Rahula ran downstairs. He loved his mother dearly, but he also loved his
father. He had spent all his days with his mother, but had never spent even one
whole day with his father. He wished he could be like Nanda and live by the
Buddha’s side. He ran quickly across the courtyard and out the south gate until
he caught up with the Buddha. The Buddha smiled and extended his hand.
Though the spring sun was already growing hot, Rahula felt protected by his
father’s shadow and love. He looked up at his father and said, “It is very cool
and refreshing by your side.”
   Yasodhara watched them from the palace balcony. She knew that the Buddha
had given Rahula permission to return with him to the monastery for the day.
   Rahula asked the Buddha, “What is my inheritance?”
   The Buddha answered, “Come to the monastery, and I will transmit it to you.”
   When they returned to the monastery, Sariputta shared his food with Rahula.
Rahula ate in silence as he sat between the Buddha and Sariputta. He was glad to
see his young uncle, Nanda. The Buddha told Rahula that he could sleep the
night in Sariputta’s hut. All the bhikkhus were fond of Rahula and treated him so
warmly, Rahula wished he could live at the monastery forever. But Sariputta
explained to him that if he wanted to stay at the monastery, he would have to
become a monk. Rahula clasped Sariputta’s hand and asked if he could ask the
Buddha to ordain him. The Buddha nodded yes when Rahula asked him, and he
instructed Sariputta to ordain the young boy.


   At first Sariputta thought the Buddha was jesting, but when he saw how
serious the Buddha was, he asked, “But, Master, how can one so young become
a bhikkhu?”
   The Buddha answered, “We will allow him to practice in preparation for full
vows in the future. Let him take the vows of a novice for now. He can be given
the task of chasing away the crows that disturb the bhikkhus during sitting
meditation.”
   Sariputta shaved Rahula’s head and gave him the three refuges. He taught
Rahula four precepts: do not kill, do not steal, do not speak falsehoods, and do
not drink alcohol. He took one of his own robes and cut it down to size for
Rahula. He showed Rahula how to wear it and how to hold the bowl for begging.
Rahula looked just like a miniature bhikkhu. He slept in Sariputta’s hut and went
begging with him each day in the small hamlets that bordered the monastery.
Although the older bhikkhus ate only one meal a day, Sariputta feared Rahula
would lack adequate nutrition for his growing body, and so he let the boy eat an
evening meal, too. Lay disciples remembered to bring milk and extra food for
the little monk.
   When the news that Rahula had shaved his head and put on a bhikkhu’s robe
reached the palace, it caused King Suddhodana to become very upset. Both the
king and queen missed Rahula terribly. They had expected him to visit the
monastery for just a few days and then return to the palace. They hadn’t dreamed
he might remain in the monastery as a novice. They were lonely without their
grandson. Yasodhara felt a mixture of sadness and happiness. Though she missed
her son intensely, she was comforted to know he was now close to his father
after not seeing him for so many years.
   One afternoon, the king mounted his royal carriage with Queen Gotami and
Yasodhara, and paid a visit to the monastery. They were met by the Buddha.
Nanda and Rahula came out to greet them too. In his excitement, Rahula ran to
his mother, and Yasodhara embraced her son warmly. Then Rahula hugged both
his grandparents.
   The king bowed to the Buddha and then said rather reproachfully, “I suffered
unbelievably when you abandoned home to become a monk. Not long ago,
Nanda left me as well. It is too much to bear to lose Rahula. For a family man
like myself, the bonds between father and son and grandfather and grandson are
very important. The pain I felt when you left was like a knife cutting into my
skin. After cutting into my skin, the knife cut into my flesh. After cutting into
my flesh, the knife has cut clear to the bone. I beseech you to consider your


actions. In the future, you should not allow a child to be ordained unless he has
received prior approval by his parents.”
   The Buddha tried to comfort the king by speaking about the truths of
impermanence and the absence of a separate self. He reminded him that the daily
practice of mindfulness was the only gate by which suffering could be overcome.
Nanda and Rahula now had a chance to deeply live such a life. The Buddha
encouraged his father to appreciate their good fortune and to continue to practice
the way of awareness in daily life in order to find true happiness.
   The king felt his pain lighten. Gotami and Yasodhara were also comforted and
reassured by the Buddha’s words.
   Later that day, the Buddha said to Sariputta, “From now on, we will not
receive children into the community of bhikkhus without the approval of their
parents. Please note that in our monastic code.”
   Time passed quickly. The Buddha and his sangha had rested in the kingdom of
Sakya for more than six months. New ordinations had increased the number of
bhikkhus to more than five hundred. The number of lay disciples was too great
to be counted. King Suddhodana also gave the sangha another place to build a
monastery—the former summer palace of Prince Siddhartha, north of the capital,
with its cool and spacious gardens. Venerable Sariputta organized a large number
of bhikkhus to set up monastic living there. The presence of this new monastery
helped assure a firm foundation for the practice of the Way in the Sakya
kingdom.
   The Buddha wished to return to Bamboo Forest in time for the rainy season
retreat, as he had promised King Bimbisara and the bhikkhus who had remained
there. King Suddhodana invited the Buddha for a last meal before his departure
and asked him to give a discourse on the Dharma for the royal family and all
members of the Sakya clan.
   The Buddha used this occasion to speak about applying the Way to political
life. He said the Way could illuminate the realm of politics, assisting those
involved in governing the kingdom to bring about social equality and justice. He
said, “If you practice the Way, you will increase your understanding and
compassion and better serve the people. You will find ways to bring about peace
and happiness without depending on violence at all. You do not need to kill,
torture, or imprison people, or confiscate property. This is not an impossible
ideal, but something which can be actually realized.
   “When a politician possesses enough understanding and love, he sees the truth
about poverty, misery, and oppression. Such a person can find the means to


reform the government in order to reduce the gap between rich and poor and
cease the use of force against others.
   “My friends, political leaders and rulers must set an example. Don’t live in the
lap of luxury because wealth only creates a greater barrier between you and the
people. Live a simple, wholesome life, using your time to serve the people,
rather than pursuing idle pleasures. A leader cannot earn the trust and respect of
his people if he does not set a good example. If you love and respect the people,
they will love and respect you in return. Rule by virtue differs from rule by law
and order. Rule by virtue does not depend on punishment. According to the Way
of Awakening, true happiness can only be attained by the path of virtue.”
   King Suddhodana and all those present listened intently to the Buddha. Prince
Dronodanaraja, the Buddha’s uncle and the father of Devadatta and Ananda,
said, “Rule by virtue, as you have described it, is truly beautiful. But I believe
that you alone possess the character and virtue needed to realize such a path.
Why don’t you stay in Kapilavatthu and help create a new form of government
right here in Sakya kingdom which will bring peace, joy, and happiness to all the
people?”
   King Suddhodana added, “I am old. If you agree to remain, I will gladly
abdicate the throne in your favor. With your virtue, integrity, and intelligence, I
am sure all the people will stand behind you. Before long our country would
prosper as it never has before.”
   The Buddha smiled and did not speak right away. Looking kindly at his father,
he said, “Father, I am no longer the son of one family, one clan, or even one
country. My family is now all beings, my home is the Earth, and my position is
that of a monk who depends on the generosity of others. I have chosen this path,
not the path of politics. I believe I can best serve all beings in this way.”
   Although Queen Gotami and Yasodhara did not think it befitting to express
their own views during this gathering, they were both moved to tears by the
Buddha’s words. They knew what he said was correct.
   The Buddha continued speaking to the king and all those present about the
five precepts and how to apply them in family life and society. The five precepts
were the foundation of a happy family and a peaceful society. He explained each
precept carefully, and concluded by saying, “If you want the people to be united,
you must first obtain their faith and trust. If political leaders practice the five
precepts, the people’s faith and trust will grow. With that faith and trust, there is
nothing the country can’t accomplish. Peace, happiness, and social equality will
be assured. Create a life based on awareness.. The dogmas of the past do not


build faith and trust nor do they encourage equality among the people. Let the
Way of Awakening offer a new path and a new faith.”
  The Buddha assured them that although he would soon be departing for
Magadha, he would return to Kapilavatthu in the future. The king and all those
present were glad to hear that.


                           Chapter Thirty-Eight
                                  O, Happiness!
From the country of Sakya, the Buddha entered the northern region of Kosala.
He was accompanied by one hundred twenty bhikkhus, including many young
men from noble families. They rested in a park near the city of Anupiya, which
was home to the Malla people. Venerable Sariputta was traveling with the
Buddha, as were Kaludayi, Nanda, and the novice Rahula.
   Less than a month after the Buddha departed from Kapilavatthu, two young
men of the Sakya clan from a very wealthy family also considered leaving home
to be ordained as bhikkhus. Their names were Mahanama and Anuruddha. Their
family owned three magnificent residences, one for each season. Mahanama
wanted to follow several of his friends who had become bhikkhus, but when he
learned that his brother had similar thoughts, he changed his mind. There were
only two sons in their family. He felt it would be a pity if both became monks.
And so Mahanama yielded to his younger brother’s desire and granted him the
privilege of asking to be ordained.
   But when Anuruddha asked his mother for her permission, she protested, “My
sons are my only happiness in this life. If you become a monk, I could not bear
it.”
   Anuruddha reminded her of the many other nobles who had already become
bhikkhus. He told her how practicing the Way could bring peace and happiness
not only to the monk but to his family and society. Because Anuruddha listened
to many of the Dharma talks the Buddha had given at Nigrodha Park, he was
able to speak eloquently about the teaching to his mother. Finally she said, “Very
well, I will let you go, but only on the condition that your good friend, Baddhiya,
decides to become a bhikkhu as well.”
   She was certain that Baddhiya would never consider becoming a bhikkhu. He
was also a member of the imperial clan and commanded a high post. His vast
responsibilities and his esteemed reputation would be difficult to abandon for the
simple life of a monk. But Anuruddha lost no time in seeking out his friend.
Baddhiya was the governor of the northern provinces. He had many soldiers
under his command. Even his own palace was flanked day and night by armed


guards. All day his quarters bustled with the comings and goings of important
dignitaries.
   Baddhiya received Anuruddha as an honored guest.
   Anuruddha told him. “I want to leave home and become a bhikkhu under the
Buddha’s guidance, but I cannot, and you are the reason why.”
   Baddhiya laughed, “What do you mean? How have I ever prevented you from
becoming a bhikkhu? Why, I would do anything I could to help you fulfill your
wish.”
   Anuruddha explained his predicament. He concluded by saying, “You have
just said you would do anything you could to help me become a bhikkhu. But the
only way is for you to become a bhikkhu yourself.”
   Baddhiya felt caught. It wasn’t that he did not also feel drawn to the Buddha
and the Path of Awakening. In fact, he had secretly intended to become a
bhikkhu at a later date, though certainly not at present. He said, “In seven more
years, I will become a bhikkhu. Wait until then.”
   “Seven years is too long to wait. Who knows if I will even be alive then?”
   Baddhiya laughed. “What are you so pessimistic about? But very well, give
me three years, and I will become a bhikkhu.”
   “Even three years is too long.”
   “Very well, seven months. I need to settle all my household arrangements and
hand over my governing duties.”
   “Why should one about to abandon home to follow the Way require so much
time to settle his affairs? A bhikkhu freely leaves all behind in order to follow
the path of freedom and liberation. If you take too long, you might change your
mind.”
   “Alright, alright, my friend. Give me seven days and I will join you.”
   Ecstatic, Anuruddha went home to inform his mother. She had not dreamed
that Governor Baddhiya would so easily abandon his prestigious position.
Suddenly she sensed the power of the path of liberation and she felt better about
letting her son leave home.
   Anuruddha persuaded a number of other friends to join him. They were
Bhagu, Kimbila, Devadatta, and Ananda. They were all princes of the imperial
clan. On the appointed day, they gathered at Devadatta’s house and set off in
search of the Buddha. They were all of age except Ananda who was still
eighteen. But Ananda had received his father’s permission to follow his elder
brother, Devadatta. The six princes traveled by carriage until they reached a
small town close to the Kosala border. They had heard that the Buddha was


staying near Anupiya.
   Anuruddha suggested they get rid of their jewels and ornaments before they
crossed the border. They all removed their necklaces, rings, and bangles and
wrapped them in a cloak. They agreed to find some poor person to give them to.
They noticed a tiny barber shop by the side of the road which was run by a
young man about their own age. He was an attractive fellow but shabbily
dressed. Anuruddha entered his shop and asked him his name.
   The young barber replied, “Upali.”
   Anuruddha asked Upali if he could direct them across the border. Upali gladly
led them there himself. Before they left him, they handed him the cloak
containing the precious jewels and ornaments. Anuruddha said, “Upali, we
intend to follow the Buddha and live as bhikkhus. We have no more use of these
jewels. We would like to give them to you. With these, you will have enough to
live in leisure the rest of your days.”
   The princes bid Upali farewell and crossed the border. When the young barber
opened up the cloak, the glint of gems and gold dazzled his eyes. He belonged to
the lowest caste in society. No one in his family had ever owned so much as an
ounce of gold or even a single ring. Now he had an entire cloakful of precious
gems. But instead of being happy, he was suddenly seized with panic. He
clasped the bundle tightly in his arms. All his former feelings of well-being
disappeared. He knew there were many people who would kill to get at the
contents of the cloak.
   Upali reflected. The young, noblemen who had enjoyed great wealth and
power were giving it all up in order to become monks. No doubt they had come
to see the dangers and burdens that wealth and fame can bring. Suddenly, he too
wanted to cast the bundle aside and follow the princes in pursuit of true peace,
joy, and liberation. Without a moment’s hesitation, he hung the bundle on a
nearby branch for the first passerby to claim, and then he too crossed the border.
Before long, he caught up with the young nobles.
   Surprised to see Upali running after them, Devadatta asked, “Upali, why are
you running after us? Where’s the bundle of gems we gave you?”
   Upali caught his breath and explained how he had tied the bundle to a tree to
be claimed by the first passerby. He said he didn’t feel at ease with such riches
and wanted to join them in becoming a bhikkhu under the guidance of the
Buddha.
   Devadatta laughed. “You want to become a bhikkhu? But you’re a—”
   Anuruddha cut Devadatta off, “Wonderful! Wonderful! We would be pleased


if you would join us. The Buddha teaches that the sangha is like a great sea and
the bhikkhus are like many rivers that flow into that sea becoming one with it.
Though we may be born into different castes, once we join the sangha, we are all
brothers with no distinctions dividing us.”
   Baddhiya extended his hand to shake Upali’s. He introduced himself as the
former governor of the north provinces of Sakya. He introduced the other
princes to Upali who bowed deeply to each one. Together the seven young men
continued on their way.
   They reached Anupiya the next day and were told that the Buddha was staying
in a forest two miles northeast of the city. They made their way to the forest and
there met the Buddha. Baddhiya spoke on behalf of the group. The Buddha
nodded his acceptance of their request to be ordained. Baddhiya also said, “We
would like to ask that Upali be ordained first. We will then bow to Upali as our
elder brother in the Dharma, releasing any vestiges of false pride and
discrimination that may remain in us.”
   The Buddha ordained Upali first. Because Ananda was only eighteen he took
the vows of a novice to prepare for full ordination when he reached twenty years
of age. Ananda was now the youngest member of the sangha next to Rahula.
Rahula was delighted to see Ananda.
   Three days after their ordination, they departed with the Buddha and the other
bhikkhus and headed towards Vesali, where they rested three days in Mahavana
Park. After that, it took them ten days to reach Bamboo Forest Monastery in
Rajagaha.
   Venerables Kassapa, Moggallana, and Kondanna were happy to see the
Buddha again, as were all six hundred bhikkhus living at Bamboo Forest. King
Bimbisara lost no time in paying the Buddha a visit as soon as he learned of his
arrival. The atmosphere at Bamboo Forest was happy and warm. The rainy
season was fast approaching and Venerables Kondanna and Kassapa were well
prepared. This was the third rainy season since the Buddha’s Awakening. He
spent the first at the Deer Park and the second at Bamboo Forest.
   Before Baddhiya accepted the governor’s post, he had wholeheartedly studied
spiritual matters. Now, under Venerable Kassapa’s guidance at Bamboo Forest,
he devoted heart and mind to his practice, spending almost all his time
meditating. He preferred sleeping beneath the trees to sleeping in a hut. One
night while sitting in meditation beneath a tree, he experienced a happiness
greater than any he had ever known. He exclaimed, “O, happiness! O,
happiness!”


   Another bhikkhu sitting nearby heard Baddhiya call out. The next morning
this same bhikkhu reported to the Buddha, “Lord, late last night while I was
sitting in meditation, I heard bhikkhu Baddhiya suddenly call out, ‘O, happiness!
0, happiness!’ It appears he misses the wealth and fame he left behind. I thought
it best to tell you.”
   The Buddha only nodded.
   After the noon meal, the Buddha gave a Dharma talk. When he was finished,
he asked bhikkhu Baddhiya to come forward before the community, which also
included many lay disciples. The Buddha asked him, “Baddhiya, late last night
while sitting in meditation, did you call out, ‘O, happiness ! 0, happiness!’”
   Baddhiya joined his palms and answered, “Teacher, last night I did indeed call
out those very words.”
   “Can you tell us why?”
   “Lord, when I was the governor, I lived a life of fame, power, and wealth.
Everywhere I went I was flanked by four soldiers for protection. My palace was
never without armed guards, day and night. Even so, there was never a moment I
felt safe. I was almost constantly filled with fear and anxiety. But now I can walk
and sit alone in the deep forest. I know no fear or anxiety. Instead I feel ease,
peace, and joy such as I never felt before. Teacher, living the life of a bhikkhu
brings me such great happiness and contentment, I am no longer afraid of
anyone or of losing anything. I am as happy as a deer living freely in the forest.
Last night during my meditation, this became so clear to me that I exclaimed, ‘0,
happiness! O, happiness!’ Please forgive me for any disturbance it caused you
and the other bhikkhus.”
   The Buddha praised Baddhiya before the entire community. “It is wonderful,
Baddhiya. You have made great strides on the path of self-contentment and
detachment. The peace and joy you feel is the peace and joy to which even the
gods aspire.”
   During the rainy season retreat, the Buddha ordained many new bhikkhus,
including a talented young man named Mahakassapa. Mahakassapa was the son
of the richest man in Magadha. His father’s wealth was exceeded only by the
national treasury. Mahakassapa was married to a woman from Vesali named
Bhadra Kapilani. They had lived as husband and wife for twelve years, but both
longed to follow the spiritual path.
   Early one morning, Mahakassapa awoke before his wife. Suddenly he noticed
a poisonous snake creeping beside his wife’s arm that was hanging over the side
of the bed. Mahakassapa did not dare breathe for fear of startling the snake. It


slowly crept past Kapilani’s arm and out of the room. Mahakassapa woke his
wife up and told her what had just taken place. Together they reflected on the
uncertainty and transiency of life. Kapilani urged Mahakassapa to seek a teacher
without delay in order to study the Way. Because he had heard about the
Buddha, he went at once to Bamboo Forest. The moment he saw the Buddha, he
understood that the Buddha was his true teacher. The Buddha could easily see
that Mahakassapa was a man of rare depth, and he ordained him. Mahakassapa
told the Buddha of his wife’s longing to become a nun and follow the Way, but
the Buddha answered that the time was not yet ripe to admit women into the
sangha and that she would need to wait a little longer.


                           Chapter Thirty-Nine
                            Waiting for Daybreak
Three days after the rainy season ended, a young man named Sudatta paid a visit
to the Buddha to ask if he would come teach the Way of Awakening in Kosala.
Sudatta was an extremely wealthy merchant. He lived in the capital city,
Savatthi, in the kingdom of Kosala which was ruled by King Pasenadi. Sudatta
was known to his countrypeople as a philanthropist who always set aside a
generous portion of his income to share with orphans and the destitute. His
charitable efforts gave him much satisfaction and happiness. His people called
him “Anathapindika,” which means “the one who cares for the poor and
abandoned.”
   Sudatta traveled frequently to Magadha to buy and sell goods. When in
Rajagaha, he stayed with his wife’s elder brother, who was also a merchant. His
brother-in-law always treated him with the greatest affection, assuring that every
detail of his stay was pleasant. He was staying with his brother-in-law at the end
of the rainy season.
   Unlike usual, his brother-in-law did not cater to many of his needs. Instead, he
busily directed family members and servants in preparation for some great feast.
Sudatta was surprised to arrive and find the household in the midst of so much
activity. He asked if they were preparing to hold a wedding or death anniversary
observance.
   The brother-in-law answered, “Tomorrow I have invited the Buddha and his
bhikkhus for a meal.”
   Sudatta asked, with some surprise, “Doesn’t ‘Buddha’ mean ’one who is
awake?’”
   “That is right. The Buddha is an awakened person. He is an enlightened
master. He is wondrous and radiant. Tomorrow you will have a chance to meet
this wonderful person.”
   He could not explain why, but just hearing the name Buddha filled Sudatta
with happiness and inspiration. He sat his brother-in-law down and asked to hear
more about this enlightened teacher. The brother-in-law explained how after
watching the serene bhikkhus beg in the city, he had gone to hear the Buddha at


Bamboo Forest Monastery. He had become one of the Buddha’s lay disciples
and had even built a number of thatched huts at the monastery as an offering, in
order to protect the bhikkhus from the sun and rain. He had overseen the
building of sixty huts in a single day.
   Perhaps, Sudatta marvelled, it was from a past life connection, but he felt
great love and respect for the Buddha well within his heart. He could not wait
until the following noon to meet the Buddha. He spent a restless night, anxiously
waiting for daybreak so that he could pay a morning visit to Bamboo Forest
Monastery. Three times he arose from his bed to see if it was dawn yet, but each
time the sky was still dark. Unable to sleep anymore, he got up anyway. He
dressed, slipped into his shoes, and walked out the door. The air was cold and
misty. He passed through Sivaka Gate and made his way to Bamboo Forest. By
the time he arrived, the first rays of morning sunlight were shining on the
bamboo leaves. Though he wanted nothing more than to meet the Buddha, he
felt somewhat nervous. To calm himself, he whispered, “Sudatta, do not worry.”
   At that very moment, the Buddha, who was doing walking meditation, passed
Sudatta. He stopped and said softly, “Sudatta.”
   Sudatta joined his palms and bowed before the Buddha. They walked to the
Buddha’s hut, and Sudatta asked the Buddha if he had slept well. The Buddha
replied he had. Sudatta told the Buddha how restless a night he had spent, so
anxious was he to come and meet the Buddha. He asked the Buddha to teach him
the Way. The Buddha spoke to Sudatta about understanding and love.
   Sudatta was filled with great happiness. He prostrated before the Buddha and
asked to become a lay disciple. The Buddha accepted him. Sudatta also invited
the Buddha and all his bhikkhus to come have a meal the following day at the
home of his brother-in-law.
   The Buddha laughed gently. “My bhikkhus and I have already been invited to
eat there today. There is no reason we should expect to eat there tomorrow, too.”
   Sudatta said, “Today my brother-in-law will host you. Tomorrow shall be my
offering. I regret I do not have a house of my own in Rajagaha. I entreat you to
accept my invitation.”
   The Buddha smiled his acceptance. Overjoyed, Sudatta bowed again and then
quickly returned home to assist his brother-in-law with preparations for that
day’s meal offering.
   When Sudatta heard more of the Buddha’s teaching at his brother-in-law’s
home, his happiness knew no bounds. He accompanied the Buddha and the
bhikkhus to the gate when the teaching was finished, and at once began to


prepare for the following day’s meal offering. His brother-in-law joined his
efforts with enthusiasm and even said, “Sudatta, you are still my guest. Why
don’t you let me take care of all the preparations.”
   But Sudatta would not hear of it. He insisted on taking care of all the expenses
himself, only agreeing to let the family help ready the home and cook some of
the dishes.
   When Sudatta heard more of the Buddha’s teaching the next day, his heart
opened like a flower. He knelt down and said, “Lord Buddha, the people of
Kosala have not yet had an opportunity to welcome you and your sangha and to
learn the Way of Awakening. Please consider my invitation for you to come to
Kosala and spend a period of time. Please show compassion to the people of
Kosala.”
   The Buddha agreed to discuss the idea with his senior disciples. He promised
to give Sudatta a response within a few days.
   A few days later Sudatta visited Bamboo Forest Monastery and received the
happy news that the Buddha had decided to accept his invitation. The Buddha
asked him if there would be some suitable place near Savatthi where a large
community of bhikkhus could dwell. Sudatta assured him that he would find a
place and would provide for all the sangha’s needs while they were there.
Sudatta also suggested that the Buddha allow Venerable Sariputta to come to
Kosala with him first in order to assist in preparations for the Buddha’s arrival.
The Buddha asked Sariputta whether or not he would like that, and Sariputta
replied he would be happy to go.
   A week later Sudatta came to Bamboo Forest where he met Sariputta. They set
off together, crossing the Ganga and traveling to Vesali, where they were met by
Ambapali, and they rested the night in her mango grove. Sariputta told her that
she could expect the Buddha and a large number of bhikkhus to pass through
Vesali on their way to Kosala in another six months. Ambapali said she would be
most happy to offer them food and a place to sleep. She told Sariputta and
Sudatta that she was most honored to receive them as guests. She commended
the young merchant on his many charitable works and encouraged him in his
efforts to have the Buddha bring the teaching to Kosala.
   After bidding farewell to Ambapali, they headed northwest along the banks of
the Aciravati River. Sudatta had never walked such distances before, having
always used a carriage in the past. Everywhere they stopped, he announced to
people that the Buddha and his sangha would be traveling through the land, and
he asked the people to welcome him.


   “The Buddha is an awakened master. Prepare to welcome him and his sangha
with jubilation.”
   Kosala was a large and prosperous kingdom, no less powerful than Magadha.
Its southern border was marked by the Ganga and its northern border brushed the
feet of the Himalayas. Sudatta, or “Anathapindika,” was known to everyone
wherever they went. The people trusted what he told them, and they all looked
forward to meeting the Buddha and his sangha. Every morning when Venerable
Sariputta went begging, Sudatta accompanied him to speak to as many people as
he could about the Buddha.
   They reached Savatthi after a month. Sudatta invited Sariputta to his home for
a meal and introduced him to his parents and wife. He asked Sariputta to speak
about the Dharma, after which his parents and wife asked to take the three
refuges and five precepts. Sudatta’s wife was a lovely and graceful woman. Her
name was Punnalakkhana. They had four children—three girls and a boy. The
daughters were named Subhadha Elder, Subhadha Younger, and Sumagadha.
Their son, the youngest child, was named Rala.
   Sariputta begged every morning in the city and slept in the forest by the banks
of the river at night. Sudatta lost no time in searching for a place to host the
Buddha and the bhikkhus.


                                Chapter Forty
                            Cover the Land in Gold
Of all the places Sudatta visited, none was more beautiful and peaceful than the
park which belonged to Prince Jeta. Sudatta felt sure that if he could acquire this
park it would serve as the perfect place from which the Buddha’s Way of
Awakening could be spread to all corners of the kingdom. Sudatta went to see
Prince Jeta and found him entertaining a palace official. Sudatta respectfully
greeted them both and then expressed directly his hope that the prince would sell
him the park to provide a practice center for the Buddha. Prince Jeta was only
twenty years old. The park had been a gift the previous year from his father,
King Pasenadi. The prince looked at the palace official and then at Sudatta, and
replied, “My royal father gave me the park. I am very attached to it. I would only
part with it if you agreed to cover every square inch of it in gold coins.”
   Prince Jeta was speaking in jest. He certainly wasn’t prepared for the young
merchant to take him seriously. But Sudatta responded, “Agreed, I will meet
your price. Tomorrow I will have the gold brought to the park.”
   Prince Jeta was startled. “But I was only joking. I do not want to sell my park.
Don’t bother bringing the gold.”
   Sudatta answered with resolve, “Honorable Prince, you are a member of the
royal family. You must carry out the words you have spoken.”
   Sudatta looked at the palace official drinking tea for support. “Is that not so,
Your Excellency?”
   The official nodded. He turned to the prince and said, “The merchant
Anathapindika speaks the truth. If you hadn’t actually quoted a price, it would be
different. But you cannot withdraw your offer now.”
   Prince Jeta submitted, but he secretly hoped Sudatta would not be able to meet
his price. Sudatta bowed and departed. Early the next morning, Sudatta sent
great carts of gold coins and had his servants spread it over the entire park.
   Prince Jeta was astounded when he saw the great mounds of gold. He
understood that this had been no ordinary business agreement. He asked himself
why anyone would give so much gold for one park? This Buddha and his sangha
must be truly extraordinary for the young merchant to go to such lengths. The


prince asked Sudatta to tell him about the Buddha. Sudatta’s eyes shone as he
spoke about his Teacher, the Dharma, and the Sangha. He promised that he
would bring Venerable Sariputta to meet the prince the following day. Prince Jeta
found himself moved by the things Sudatta told him about the Buddha. He
looked up to see that Sudatta’s men had already spread gold coins over two
thirds of the forest. Just as a fourth cart was arriving, he held out his hand and
stopped them.
   He said to Sudatta, “That is enough gold. Let the remaining land be my gift. I
want to contribute to this beautiful project of yours.”
   Sudatta was pleased to hear this. When he brought Sariputta to meet the
prince, the prince was impressed by the bhikkhu’s peaceful bearing. Together
they went to visit the park, which Sudatta had decided to call “Jetavana,” or
“Jeta Grove,” in honor of the prince. Sudatta suggested to Sariputta that he live
at Jetavana to help direct the building of the monastery. He said his family could
bring food offerings to Sariputta each day. Together Sudatta, Sariputta, and the
prince discussed building huts, a Dharma hall, a meditation hall, and bathrooms.
Sudatta expressed a wish to build a three-tiered gate at the forest’s entrance.
Sariputta contributed a number of helpful suggestions regarding setting up the
monastery, as he was now well experienced in such matters. They selected an
especially cool and tranquil spot to build the Buddha’s thatched hut. They
oversaw the making of pathways and the digging of wells.
   The city people soon heard how Sudatta had paved the forest in gold in order
to purchase it from the prince. They learned that a monastery was being built to
welcome the Buddha and his sangha, who would soon arrive from Magadha.
Sariputta began to give Dharma talks at Jetavana and the number of people who
attended grew daily. Though none of the people had yet met the Buddha, they all
felt drawn to his teaching.
   Four months later the monastery was nearly completed. Sariputta set off for
Rajagaha in order to lead the Buddha and the bhikkhus back to Jetavana. He met
them in the streets of Vesali. Several hundred bhikkhus, clad in saffron robes,
were begging in the streets. He learned that the Buddha and the bhikkhus had
arrived in Vesali only a few days previously and were dwelling nearby at Great
Forest. The Buddha asked about preparations in Savatthi, and Sariputta
recounted how well things were going.
   The Buddha told Sariputta that he had left Kondanna and Uruvela Kassapa in
charge of the community at Bamboo Forest. Of the five hundred bhikkhus
presently with the Buddha in Vesali, two hundred would remain to practice in the


vicinity. The remaining three hundred would accompany him on the journey to
Kosala. The Buddha told Sariputta that Ambapali had invited the entire sangha
for a meal offering the next day. The day after that they would depart for
Savatthi.
   Ambapali was happy for the chance to offer the Buddha and his bhikkhus a
meal in her mango grove. She only regretted that her son, Jivaka, was unable to
attend because of his medical studies. A curious thing happened the day before
she was to serve the Buddha and his bhikkhus a meal. On her way home from
visiting the Buddha, her carriage was stopped by several princes of the Licchavi
clan. They were the most powerful and wealthiest lords in Vesali and traveled in
handsome, elegant carriages. They asked her where she was going, and she
replied she was on her way home to prepare to receive the Buddha and his
bhikkhus the following day. The young nobles suggested she forget about the
Buddha and invite them instead.
   The princes said, “Invite us and we will pay for the meal with one hundred
thousand pieces of gold.” They were certain that hosting a monk could not
possibly be as amusing or profitable as entertaining themselves.
   Ambapali was not interested. She replied, “It is clear you do not know the
Buddha or you would not speak in such a manner. I have already made
arrangements to invite the Buddha and his sangha. Even if you offered me the
entire city of Vesali and all the land surrounding it, I would refuse. Now if you
please, let me pass. I have much to do to prepare for tomorrow.”
   Taken aback, the Licchavi nobles let her pass. Little did Ambapali know that
after their encounter with her, they decided to go and see this teacher who was so
highly respected by Ambapali. They left their carriages at the entrance to Great
Forest and walked in.
   The Buddha could tell that these young men possessed many seeds of
compassion and wisdom. He invited them to be seated and he told them about
his own life and search for the Way. He told them about the path to overcome
suffering and realize liberation. He knew they belonged to the same warrior caste
he had belonged to and looking at them, he could see himself as a young man.
He spoke to them with warm understanding.
   Their hearts were opened by the Buddha’s words. They felt they could see
themselves for the first time. They understood that wealth and power were not
enough to bring them true happiness. They knew they had found a path for their
lives. They all asked to be accepted as lay disciples. They also asked if they
could offer the Buddha and his sangha a meal the next day.


   The Buddha said, “We have already been invited by Ambapali for tomorrow.”
   The young nobles smiled, remembering their encounter with Ambapali.
   “Then allow us to offer you a meal on the following day.”
   The Buddha smiled his acceptance.
   Ambapali invited all her relations and friends to the mango grove the next day.
She invited the Licchavi nobles, as well, to hear the Buddha offer teaching.
   The day after, the Buddha and a hundred bhikkhus ate in the princes’ palace.
They were served elegant and refined vegetarian dishes that had been prepared
with the utmost skill and care. The princes also offered the bhikkhus jackfruit,
mangos, bananas, and rose-apples freshly picked from their own orchards. When
the meal was finished, the Buddha spoke about dependent co-arising and the
Noble Eightfold Path. He touched everyone’s heart with the teaching. Twelve
young nobles asked to be ordained as bhikkhus. The Buddha happily accepted
them. They included Otthaddha and Sunakhatta, two princes who wielded great
influence in the Licchavi clan.
   When the meal and teaching were completed, the Licchavi nobles entreated
the Buddha to come dwell in Vesali the following year. They promised to build a
monastery in Great Forest where several hundred bhikkhus could dwell. The
Buddha accepted their proposal.
   Ambapali visited the Buddha early the next morning. She expressed her desire
to offer the mango grove to the Buddha and his sangha. The Buddha accepted
her gift. Shortly afterwards, the Buddha, Sariputta, and three hundred bhikkhus
headed north for Savatthi.


                            Chapter Forty-One
                       Has Anyone Seen My Mother?
The road to Savatthi was now familiar to Sariputta. Because he and
Anathapindika had nourished people’s interest in the Buddha and the sangha,
they were greeted warmly wherever they went. At nights the bhikkhus rested in
the cool forests along the banks of the Aciravati River. They traveled in three
groups. The Buddha and Sariputta led the first group. The second group was
headed by Assaji. The third group was under the guidance of Moggallana. The
bhikkhus maintained peaceful serenity as they walked. Sometimes local people
gathered in the forests or along the riverbanks to listen to the Buddha’s teaching.
   The day they arrived in Savatthi, they were greeted by Sudatta and Prince Jeta
who took them to the new monastery. Seeing how well planned Jetavana was,
the Buddha praised Sudatta. Sudatta responded by saying it was all thanks to the
ideas and labor of Venerable Sariputta and Prince Jeta.
   Novice Rahula was now twelve years old. Though he had been assigned to
study under Sariputta’s guidance, Sariputta had been gone for six months, and so
Moggallana had taken his place. At Jetavana, Rahula could resume his studies
with Sariputta.
   Prince Jeta and Sudatta arranged a reception immediately after the Buddha’s
arrival. Prince Jeta had come to deeply admire the Buddha through his contacts
with Venerable Sariputta. They invited all the local people to come to hear the
Buddha speak on the Dharma. Many came, including Price Jeta’s mother, Queen
Mallika, and his sixteen-year-old sister, Princess Vajiri. After hearing about the
Buddha for months, everyone was most anxious to see him in person. The
Buddha spoke about the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path.
   After hearing the Dharma talk, the queen and princess felt their hearts open.
They both wanted to become lay disciples, but did not dare to ask. The queen
wanted to first seek the approval of her husband, King Pasenadi. She was sure
that in the near future the king would meet the Buddha and share her feelings.
Pasenadi’s own sister, who was King Bimbisara’s wife, had already taken the
three refuges with the Buddha three years before.
   Many important religious leaders in Savatthi also attended the Buddha’s


discourse that day. Most came out of curiosity rather than a desire to learn
anything. But several of them felt their hearts suddenly illuminated when they
heard the Buddha speak. Others saw in him a worthy opponent who challenged
their own beliefs. Everyone agreed that his presence in Savatthi was a significant
event in the spiritual life of Kosala.
   When the reception and Dharma talk were over, Sudatta respectfully knelt
before the Buddha and said, “My family and I, together with all our friends and
relations, offer Jetavana monastery to you and your sangha.”
   The Buddha said, “Sudatta, your merit is great. Thanks to you, the sangha will
be protected from sun and rain, wild animals, snakes, and mosquitoes. This
monastery will draw bhikkhus from all four directions, now and in the future.
You have supported the Dharma with all your heart. I hope you will continue to
devote yourself to practicing the Way.”
   The next morning the Buddha and the bhikkhus went into the city to beg.
Sariputta divided the bhikkhus into twelve groups, each numbering fifteen. The
presence of the saffron-robed monks further aroused the people’s interest in the
new Jetavana Monastery. The people admired the calm and quiet manner of the
bhikkhus.
   Once a week the Buddha gave a Dharma talk at Jetavana. Great numbers of
people attended. Thus, it was not long before King Pasenadi was well aware of
the impact of the Buddha’s presence. He was too busy with political affairs to
visit the Buddha himself, but he listened to many members of his court speak
about the new monastery and the bhikkhus from Magadha. During a family
meal, the king brought up the subject of the Buddha. Queen Mallika informed
him of Prince Jeta’s contributions to the monastery. The king asked the prince to
tell him about the Buddha and the prince recounted all he had seen and heard.
The prince said that if the king granted permission, he wished to become a lay
disciple of the Buddha.
   King Pasenadi had a hard time believing that a monk as young as the Buddha
could have achieved true enlightenment. According to the prince, the Buddha
was thirty-nine years old, the same age as the king. The king speculated that
there was no way the Buddha could have attained a higher state than such elderly
spiritual teachers as Puruna Kassapa, Makkhali Gosala, Nigantha Nathaputta,
and Sanjana Belatthiputta. Although the king would have liked to believe his
son, he had his doubts. He decided that when an occasion arose he would go and
meet the Buddha himself.
   The rainy season was approaching and the Buddha decided to spend it at


Jetavana. Thanks to the experience gained during previous rainy seasons at
Bamboo Forest, the Buddha’s senior disciples organized the retreat with ease.
Sixty new bhikkhus joined the community in Savatthi. Sudatta also introduced
many friends who became lay disciples and enthusiastically supported the
activities of the monastery.
   One afternoon, the Buddha received a young man whose face was lined with
grief and misery. The Buddha learned that the man had recently lost his only son
and for several days had stood in the cemetery crying out loud, “My son, my
son, where have you gone?” The man was unable to eat, drink, or sleep.
   The Buddha told him, “In love there is suffering.”
   The man objected, “You are wrong. Love doesn’t cause suffering. Love brings
only happiness and joy.”
   The bereaved man abruptly left before the Buddha could explain what he had
meant. The man wandered aimlessly about until he stopped to chat with a group
of men gambling in the street. He told them of his encounter with the Buddha.
The men agreed with him that the Buddha was mistaken.
   “How can love cause suffering? Love brings only happiness and joy! You’re
right. That monk Gautama was wrong.”
   Before long, news of this story spread throughout Savatthi and became a
subject for heated debate. Many spiritual leaders contended that the Buddha was
wrong about love. This matter reached the ears of King Pasenadi and that
evening during the family meal, he said to the queen, “The monk the people call
‘Buddha’ may not be as great a teacher as the people seem to think he is.”
   The queen asked, “What makes you say that? Has someone said something
bad about Teacher Gautama?”
   “This morning, I heard some palace officials discussing Gautama. They said
that according to him, the more you love the more you suffer.”
   The queen said, “If Gautama said that, it is undoubtedly true.”
   The king retorted impatiently, “You shouldn’t speak like that. Examine things
for yourself. Don’t be like some small child who believes everything the teacher
says.”
   The queen said no more. She knew that the king had not yet met the Buddha.
The next morning she asked a close friend, the brahman Nalijangha, to visit the
Buddha and ask him whether or not he had said that love was the source of
suffering, and if he had to explain why. She asked her friend to note carefully
everything the Buddha said and report back to her.
   Nalijangha went to see the Buddha and asked him the queen’s question. The


Buddha responded, “Recently I heard that a woman in Savatthi lost her mother.
She was so grief-stricken that she lost her mind and has been wandering the
streets asking everyone, ‘Have you seen my mother? Have you seen my
mother?’ I also heard about two young lovers who committed suicide together
because the girl’s parents were forcing her to marry someone else. These two
stories alone demonstrate that love can cause suffering.”
   Nalijangha repeated the Buddha’s words to Queen Mallika. One day soon
after that she caught the king in a moment of leisure, and she asked him, “My
husband, do you not love and cherish Princess Vajiri?”
   “Indeed I do,” answered the king, surprised by the question.
   “If some misfortune befell her, would you suffer?”
   The king was startled. Suddenly he saw clearly that the seeds of suffering
existed within love. His sense of well-being was replaced with worry. The
Buddha’s words contained a cruel truth which greatly disturbed the king. He
said, “I will go visit this monk Gautama as soon as I have a chance.”
   The queen was happy for she was confident that once the king met the
Buddha, he would understand how extraordinary the Buddha’s teaching was.


                           Chapter Forty-Two
                           Love Is Understanding
King Pasenadi came all alone to visit the Buddha, unaccompanied by even a
guard. He left his carriage and driver at the monastery gate. He was greeted by
the Buddha in front of the Buddha’s thatched hut. After exchanging formal
greetings, the king spoke to the Buddha most frankly, “Teacher Gautama, people
praise you as the Buddha, one who has attained perfect enlightenment. But I
have been asking myself how could one as young as yourself have attained
enlightenment. Even the great masters such as Purana Kassapa, Makkhali
Gosala, Nigantha Nathaputta, and Sanjaya Belatthiputta, who are all advanced in
years, do not claim to have attained total enlightenment. Not even Pakudha
Kaccayana and Ajita Kesakambali. Do you know of these masters?”
   The Buddha responded, “Your majesty, I have heard of all those masters and
have met a number of them. Spiritual realization does not depend on age.
Months and years do not guarantee the presence of enlightenment. There are
some things which should never be disdained—a young prince, a small snake, a
spark of fire, and a young monk. A prince may be young but he possesses the
characteristics and destiny of a king. A small poisonous snake can kill a grown
man in an instant. One spark of fire can cause an entire forest or a large city to
burn to ash. And a young monk can attain total enlightenment ! Your majesty, a
wise person never disdains a young prince, a small snake, a spark of fire, or a
young monk.”
   King Pasenadi looked at the Buddha. He was impressed. The Buddha had
spoken in a calm and quiet voice and what he had said was at once simple and
profound. The king felt he could trust the Buddha. He then asked the question
that was burning within him.
   “Teacher Gautama, there are people who say you advise people not to love.
They say you have said that the more a person loves, the more he will suffer and
despair. I can see some truth in that statement, but I am unable to find peace with
it. Without love, life would seem empty of meaning. Please help me resolve
this.”
   The Buddha looked at the king warmly. “Your majesty, your question is a very


good one, and many people can benefit from it. There are many kinds of love.
We should examine closely the nature of each kind of love. Life has a great need
of the presence of love, but not the sort of love that is based on lust, passion,
attachment, discrimination, and prejudice. Majesty, there is another kind of love,
sorely needed, which consists of loving kindness and compassion, or maitri and
karuna.
   “Usually when people speak of love they are referring only to the love that
exists between parents and children, husbands and wives, family members, or
the members of one’s caste or country. Because the nature of such love depends
on the concepts of ‘me’ and ‘mine’, it remains entangled in attachment and
discrimination. People want only to love their parents, spouse, children,
grandchildren, their own relatives and countrymen. Because they are caught in
attachment, they worry about accidents that could befall their loved ones even
before such things actually take place. When such accidents do occur, they suffer
terribly. Love that is based on discrimination breeds prejudice. People become
indifferent or even hostile to those outside their own circle of love. Attachment
and discrimination are sources of suffering for ourselves and others. Majesty, the
love for which all beings truly hunger is loving kindness and compassion. Maitri
is the love that has the capacity to bring happiness to another. Karuna is the love
which has the capacity to remove another’s suffering. Maitri and karuna do not
demand anything in return. Loving kindness and compassion are not limited to
one’s parents, spouse, children, relatives, caste members, and countrymen. They
extend to all people and all beings. In maitri and karuna there is no
discrimination, no ‘mine’ or ‘not mine.’ And because there is no discrimination,
there is no attachment. Maitri and karuna bring happiness and ease suffering.
They do not cause suffering and despair. Without them, life would be empty of
meaning, as you said. With loving kindness and compassion, life is filled with
peace, joy, and contentment. Majesty, you are the ruler of an entire country. All
your people would benefit by your practice of loving kindness and compassion.”
   The king bent his head in thought. He looked up and asked the Buddha, “I
have a family to care for and a country to rule. If I don’t love my own family and
people, how can I care for them? Please help clarify this for me.”
   “Naturally, you should love your own family and people. But your love can
also extend beyond your own family and people. You love and care for the
prince and princess, but that doesn’t prevent you from loving and caring for the
other young people in the kingdom. If you can love all the young people, your
now limited love will become an all embracing love, and all the young people of


the kingdom will be as your children. That is what is meant by having a heart of
compassion. It is not just some ideal. It is something which can actually be
realized, especially by someone like you who has so many means at his
disposal.”
   “But what about the young people of other kingdoms?”
   “Nothing prevents you from loving the young people of other kingdoms as
your sons and daughters, even though they do not dwell under your rule. Just
because one loves one’s own people is no reason not to love the peoples of other
kingdoms.”
   “But how can I show my love for them when they are not under my
jurisdiction?”
   The Buddha looked at the king. “The prosperity and security of one nation
should not depend on the poverty and insecurity of other nations. Majesty,
lasting peace and prosperity are only possible when nations join together in a
common commitment to seek the welfare of all. If you truly want Kosala to
enjoy peace and to prevent the young men of your kingdom from losing their
lives on the battlefield, you must help other kingdoms find peace. Foreign and
economic policies must follow the way of compassion for true peace to be
possible. At the same time as you love and care for your own kingdom, you can
love and care for other kingdoms such as Magadha, Kasi, Videha, Sakya, and
Koliya.
   “Majesty, last year I visited my family in the kingdom of Sakya. I rested
several days in Arannakutila at the foot of the Himalayas. There I spent much
time reflecting on a politics based on nonviolence. I saw that nations can indeed
enjoy peace and security without having to resort to violent measures such as
imprisonment and execution. I spoke of these things with my father, King
Suddhodana. Now I take this opportunity to share these same ideas with you. A
ruler who nourishes his compassion does not need to depend on violent means.”
   The king exclaimed, “Wondrous! Truly wondrous! Your words are most
inspiring! You truly are the enlightened one! I promise to reflect on all you have
said today. I will penetrate your words, which contain so much wisdom. But for
now, please allow me to ask one more simple question. Ordinarily, love does
contain elements of discrimination, desire, and attachment. According to you,
that kind of love creates worry, suffering, and despair. How can one love without
desire and attachment? How can I avoid creating worry and suffering in the love
I hold for my own children?”
   The Buddha replied, “We need to look at the nature of our love. Our love


should bring peace and happiness to the ones we love. If our love is based on a
selfish desire to possess others, we will not be able to bring them peace and
happiness. On the contrary, our love will make them feel trapped. Such a love is
no more than a prison. If the persons we love are unable to be happy because of
our love, they will find a way to free themselves. They will not accept the prison
of our love. Gradually the love between us will turn to anger and hatred.
   “Majesty, did you hear of the tragedy that took place ten days ago in Savatthi
because of selfish love? A mother felt she had been abandoned by her son when
he fell in love and married. Rather than feeling as if she had gained a daughter,
she only felt that she had lost her son, and she felt betrayed by him. Because of
that, her love turned to hatred, and she put poison in the young couple’s food,
killing them both.
   “Majesty! According to the Way of Enlightenment, love cannot exist without
understanding. Love is Understanding. If you cannot understand, you cannot
love. Husbands and wives who do not understand each other cannot love each
other. Brothers and sisters who do not understand each other cannot love each
other. Parents and children who do not understand each other cannot love each
other. If you want your loved ones to be happy, you must learn to understand
their sufferings and their aspirations. When you understand, you will know how
to relieve their sufferings and how to help them fulfill their aspirations. That is
true love. If you only want your loved ones to follow your own ideas and you
remain ignorant of their needs, it is not truly love. It is only a desire to possess
another and attempt to fulfill your own needs, which cannot be fulfilled in that
way.
   “Majesty! The people of Kosala have sufferings and aspirations. If you can
understand their sufferings and aspirations, you will be able to truly love them.
All the officials in your court have sufferings and aspirations. Understand those
sufferings and aspirations, and you will know how to bring them happiness.
Thanks to that, they will remain loyal to you all their lives. The queen, prince,
and princess have their own sufferings and aspirations. If you can understand
those sufferings and aspirations, you will be able to bring them happiness. When
every person enjoys happiness, peace, and joy, you yourself will know
happiness, peace, and joy. That is the meaning of love according to the Way of
Awakening.”
   King Pasenadi was deeply moved. No other spiritual teacher or brahmana
priest had ever opened the door to his heart and allowed him to understand
things so deeply. The presence of this teacher, he thought to himself, was of


great value to his country. He wanted to be the Buddha’s student. After a
moment of silence, he looked up at the Buddha and said, “I thank you for
shedding so much light on these matters for me. But there remains one thing that
still bothers me. You said that love based on desire and attachment creates
suffering and despair, while love based on compassion brings only peace and
happiness. But while I see that love based on the way of compassion is not
selfish or self-serving, it still can bring pain and suffering. I love my people.
When they suffer from some natural disaster like a typhoon or flood, I suffer,
too. I am sure it is the same for you. Surely you suffer when you see someone
who is sick or dying.”
   “Your question is very good. Thanks to this question, you will be able to
understand more deeply the nature of compassion. First of all, you should know
that the suffering caused by a love based on desire and attachment is a thousand
times greater than the suffering that results from compassion. It is necessary to
distinguish between the two kinds of suffering—one which is entirely useless
and serves only to disturb our minds and bodies and the other which nourishes
caring and responsibility. Love based on compassion can provide the energy
needed to respond to the suffering of others. Love based on attachment and
desire only creates anxiety and more suffering. Compassion provides fuel for the
most helpful actions and service. Great King! Compassion is most necessary.
Pain that results from compassion can be a helpful pain. If you cannot feel
another person’s pain, you are not truly human.
   “Compassion is the fruit of understanding. Practicing the Way of Awareness is
to realize the true face of life. That true face is impermanence. Everything is
impermanent and without a separate self. Everything must one day pass away.
One day your own body will pass away. When a person sees into the
impermanent nature of all things, his way of looking becomes calm and serene.
The presence of impermanence does not disturb his heart and mind. And thus the
feelings of pain that result from compassion do not carry the bitter and heavy
nature that other kinds of suffering do. On the contrary, compassion gives a
person greater strength. Great King! Today you have heard some of the basic
tenets of the Way of Liberation. On another day, I would like to share more of
the teachings with you.”
   King Pasenadi’s heart was filled with gratitude. He stood up and bowed to the
Buddha. He knew that one day soon he would ask to be accepted as a lay
disciple of the Buddha. He knew that Queen Mallika, Prince Jeta, and Princess
Vajiri already felt a special bond with the Buddha. He wanted the entire family


to receive the refuges together. He knew that his younger sister, Kosaladevi, and
her husband, King Bimbisara, had already received them.
   That evening, Queen Mallika and Princess Vajiri noticed a marked difference
in the king. He seemed unusually calm and content. They knew it was the result
of his encounter with the Buddha. They wanted very much to ask the king about
his meeting with the Buddha, but they knew that they should wait and let the
king tell them about it in his own time.


                           Chapter Forty-Three
                         Everyone’s Tears Are Salty
King Pasenadi’s visit to Jetavana stirred interest among the people and added to
the stature of the Buddha’s sangha. Palace officials noticed how King Pasenadi
did not miss a single weekly Dharma talk, and many of them began to join him.
Some did so out of admiration for the Buddha’s teaching, while others went only
in hopes of pleasing the king. The number of intellectuals and young people
visiting Jetavana also mounted daily. During the three months of retreat, more
than a hundred fifty young men were ordained by Sariputta. Religious leaders of
other sects that had long enjoyed the king’s patronage began to feel threatened,
and some of them began to regard Jetavana Monastery with less than
sympathetic eyes. The retreat season concluded with a large service at which the
king offered new robes to every bhikkhu and distributed food and other basic
necessities to poor families. At this ceremony, the king and his family formally
took the three refuges.
   After the retreat, the Buddha and other bhikkhus traveled to neighboring
regions in order to spread the Dharma to more and more people. One day, as the
Buddha and bhikkhus were begging in a village near the banks of the Ganga, the
Buddha spotted a man carrying nightsoil. The man was an untouchable named
Sunita. Sunita had heard about the Buddha and bhikkhus, but this was the first
time he had ever seen them. He was alarmed, knowing how dirty his clothes
were and how foul he smelled from carrying nightsoil. He quickly moved off the
path and made his way down to the river. But the Buddha was determined to
share the Way with Sunita. When Sunita veered from the path, the Buddha did
the same. Understanding the Buddha’s intent, Sariputta and Meghiya, the
Buddha’s attendant at the time, followed him. The rows of other bhikkhus came
to a halt and they quietly watched.
   Sunita was panic-stricken. He hastily put the buckets of nightsoil down and
looked for a place to hide. Above him stood the bhikkhus in their saffron robes,
while before him approached the Buddha and two other bhikkhus. Not knowing
what else to do, Sunita waded up to his knees in water and stood with his palms
joined.


   Curious villagers came out of their homes and lined the shore to watch what
was happening. Sunita had veered off the path because he was afraid he would
pollute the bhikkhus. He could not have guessed the Buddha would follow him.
Sunita knew that the sangha included many men from noble castes. He was sure
that polluting a bhikkhu was an unforgivable act. He hoped the Buddha and
bhikkhus would leave him and return to the road. But the Buddha did not leave.
He walked right up to the water’s edge and said, “My friend, please come closer
so we may talk.”
   Sunita, his palms still joined, protested, “Lord, I don’t dare!”
   “Why not?” asked the Buddha.
   “I am an untouchable. I don’t want to pollute you and your monks.”
   The Buddha replied, “On our path, we no longer distinguish between castes.
You are a human being like the rest of us. We are not afraid we will be polluted.
Only greed, hatred, and delusion can pollute us. A person as pleasant as yourself
brings us nothing but happiness. What is your name?”
   “Lord, my name is Sunita.”
Sunita protested, “Lord, I do not dare come closer. I am an untouchable.”


   “Sunita, would you like to become a bhikkhu like the rest of us?”
   “I couldn’t!”
   “Why not?”
   “I’m an untouchable!”
   “Sunita, I have already explained that on our path there is no caste. In the Way
of Awakening, caste no longer exists. It is like the Ganga, Yamuno, Aciravati,
Sarabhu, Mahi, and Rohini rivers. Once they empty into the sea, they no longer
retain their separate identities. A person who leaves home to follow the Way
leaves caste behind whether he was born a brahman, ksatriya, vaisya, sudra, or
untouchable. Sunita, if you like, you can become a bhikkhu like the rest of us.”


   Sunita could hardly believe his ears. He placed his joined palms before his
forehead and said, “No one has ever spoken so kindly to me before. This is the
happiest day of my life. If you accept me as your disciple, I vow to devote all my
being to practicing your teaching.”
   The Buddha handed his bowl to Meghiya and reached his hand out to Sunita.
He said, “Sariputta! Help me bathe Sunita. We will ordain him a bhikkhu right
here on the bank of the river.”
   Venerable Sariputta smiled. He placed his own bowl on the ground and came
forward to assist the Buddha. Sunita felt awkward and uncomfortable as
Sariputta and the Buddha scrubbed him clean, but he didn’t dare protest. The
Buddha asked Meghiya to go up and ask Ananda for an extra robe. After Sunita
was ordained, the Buddha assigned him to Sariputta’s care. Sariputta led him
back to Jetavana while the Buddha and the rest of the bhikkhus calmly continued
their begging.
   The local people had witnessed all this take place. News quickly spread that
the Buddha had accepted an untouchable into his sangha. This caused a furor
among higher castes in the capital. Never in the history of Kosala had an
untouchable been accepted into a spiritual community. Many condemned the
Buddha for violating sacred tradition. Others went so far as to suggest that the
Buddha was plotting to overthrow the existing order and wreak havoc in the
country.
   The echoes of all these accusations reached the monastery through lay
disciples as well as from bhikkhus who heard people saying such things in the
city. Senior disciples Sariputta, Mahakassapa, Mahamoggallana, and Anuruddha
met to discuss the people’s reactions with the Buddha.
   The Buddha said, “Accepting untouchables into the sangha was simply a
question of time. Our way is a way of equality. We do not recognize caste.
Though we may encounter difficulties over Sunita’s ordination now, we will
have opened a door for the first time in history that future generations will thank
us for. We must have courage.”
   Moggallana said, “We do not lack courage or endurance. But how can we help
reduce the hostility of public opinion to make it easier for the bhikkhus to
practice?”
   Sariputta said, “The important thing is to remain trusting of our practice. I will
strive to assist Sunita in making progress on the path. His success will be the
strongest argument in our favor. We can also seek ways to explain our belief in
equality to the people. What do you think, Master?”


   The Buddha placed his hand on Sariputta’s shoulder. “You have just spoken
my own thoughts,” he said.
   Before long, the uproar over Sunita’s ordination reached the ears of King
Pasenadi. A group of religious leaders requested a private audience with him and
expressed their grave concerns over the matter. Their convincing arguments
disturbed the king, and although he was a devoted follower of the Buddha, he
promised the leaders that he would look into the matter. Some days later he paid
a visit to Jetavana.
   He climbed down from his carriage and walked into the monastery grounds
alone. Bhikkhus passed him on the path beneath the cool shade of trees. The
king followed the path that led to the Buddha’s hut. He bowed to each bhikkhu
he passed. As always, the serene and composed manner of the bhikkhus
reinforced his faith in the Buddha. Halfway to the hut, he encountered a bhikkhu
sitting on a large rock beneath a great pine tree teaching a small group of
bhikkhus and lay disciples. It was a most appealing sight. The bhikkhu offering
the teaching looked less than forty years old, yet his face radiated great peace
and wisdom. His listeners were clearly absorbed by what he had to say. The king
paused to listen and was moved by what he heard. But suddenly he remembered
the purpose of his visit, and he continued on his way. He hoped to return later to
listen to the bhikkhu’s teaching.
   The Buddha welcomed the king outside his hut, inviting him to sit on a
bamboo chair. After they exchanged formal greetings, the king asked the Buddha
who the bhikkhu sitting on the rock was. The Buddha smiled and answered,
“That is Bhikkhu Sunita. He was once an untouchable who carried nightsoil.
What do you think of his teaching?”
   The king felt embarrassed. The bhikkhu with so radiant a bearing was none
other than the nightsoil carrier Sunita! He would never have guessed such was
possible. Before he knew how to respond, the Buddha said, “Bhikkhu Sunita has
devoted himself wholeheartedly to his practice from the day of his ordination.
He is a man of great sincerity, intelligence, and resolve. Though he was ordained
only three months ago, he has already earned a reputation for great virtue and
purity of heart. Would you like to meet him and make an offering to this most
worthy bhikkhu?”
   The king replied with frankness, “I would indeed like to meet Bhikkhu Sunita
and make an offering to him. Master, your teaching is deep and wondrous! I
have never met any other spiritual teacher with so open a heart and mind. I do
not think there is a person, animal, or plant that does not benefit from the


presence of your understanding. I must tell you that I came here today with the
intention of asking how you could accept an untouchable into your sangha. But I
have seen, heard, and understood why. I no longer dare ask such a question.
Instead, allow me to prostrate myself before you.”
   The king stood up intending to prostrate himself, but the Buddha stood up, as
well, and took the king’s hand. He asked the king to be seated again. When they
were both seated, the Buddha looked at the king and said, “Majesty, in the Way
of Liberation, there is no caste. To the eyes of an enlightened person, all people
are equal. Every person’s blood is red. Every person’s tears are salty. We are all
human beings. We must find a way for all people to be able to realize their full
dignity and potential. That is why I welcomed Sunita into the sangha of
bhikkhus.”
   The king joined his palms. “I understand now. I also know that the path you
have chosen will be filled with obstacles and difficulties. But I know you possess
the strength and courage needed to overcome all such obstacles. For my own
part, I will do everything in my power to support the true teaching.”
   The king took his leave of the Buddha and returned to the pine tree in hopes of
listening to Bhikkhu Sunita’s teaching. But Bhikkhu Sunita and his listeners had
disappeared. The king saw no more than a few bhikkhus walking slowly and
mindfully down the path.


                           Chapter Forty-Four
                        The Elements Will Recombine
One day Meghiya spoke to the Buddha about Nanda’s unhappiness as a monk.
Nanda had confided to Meghiya how much he missed his fiancée in
Kapilavatthu. Nanda said, “I still remember the day I carried the Buddha’s bowl
back to Nigrodha Park. As I was leaving, Janapada Kalyani looked into my eyes
and said, ‘Hurry back. I will be waiting for you.’ I can so clearly recall the sheen
of her black hair as it brushes her slender shoulders. Her image often arises
during my sitting meditation. Every time I see her in my mind, I am filled with
longing. I am not happy being a monk.”
   The next afternoon, the Buddha invited Nanda to go for a walk with him.
They left Jetavana and headed towards a distant hamlet located by a lake. They
sat on a large boulder that overlooked the crystal clear water. A family of ducks
swam by leisurely. Birds sang in the overhanging branches of trees.
   The Buddha said, “Some of our brothers have told me that you are not happy
living the life of a bhikkhu. Is that true?”
   Nanda was silent. After a moment, the Buddha asked, “Do you feel ready to
return to Kapilavatthu to prepare to take over the throne?”
   Nanda replied hastily, “No, no. I have already told everyone that I do not like
politics. I know I don’t have the ability to rule a kingdom. I do not wish to
become the next king.”
   “Then why are you unhappy being a bhikkhu?”
   Again Nanda was silent.
   “Do you miss Kalyani?”
   Nanda blushed but he did not speak.
   The Buddha said, “Nanda, there are many young women here in Kosala as
beautiful as your Kalyani. Do you remember the reception we attended at King
Pasenadi’s palace? Did you notice any women there as pretty as Kalyani?”
   Nanda admitted, “Perhaps there are young women here as pretty as she is. But
I care only for Kalyani. In this life there is only one Kalyani.”
   “Nanda, attachment can be a great barrier to spiritual practice. The physical
beauty of a woman fades as surely as the beauty of a rose. You know that all


things are impermanent. You must learn to penetrate the impermanent nature of
things. Look.” The Buddha pointed to an old woman leaning on a cane and
hobbling across the bamboo bridge. Her face was covered with wrinkles.
   “That old woman was surely once a beauty. Kalyani’s beauty will also fade
with the years. During that same time your search for enlightenment could bring
peace and joy for this life and lives to come. Nanda, look at the two monkeys
playing over on that branch. You might not find the female attractive with her
long, pointed snout and red bottom, but to the male she is the most beautiful
monkey on earth. To him she is unique and he would sacrifice his very life to
protect her. Can you see that—”
   Nanda interrupted the Buddha. “Please don’t say anything more. I understand
what you are trying to say. I will devote myself more wholeheartedly to my
practice.”
   The Buddha smiled at his younger brother. “Pay special attention to observing
your breath. Meditate on your body, feelings, mental formations, consciousness,
and objects of your consciousness. Look deeply in order to see the process of
birth, growth, and fading of every phenomenon, from your own body, emotions,
mind, and objects of your mind. If there is anything you don’t understand, come
and ask me or Sariputta. Nanda, remember that the happiness liberation brings is
true, unconditional happiness. It can never be destroyed. Aspire to that
happiness.”
   The sky was growing dark. The Buddha and Nanda stood and walked back to
the monastery.
   Jetavana now hosted a strong and stable monastic life. The number of
bhikkhus living there had risen to five hundred. The following year the Buddha
returned to Vesali for the retreat season. The Licchavi princes had transformed
Great Forest into a monastery. They had built a two-story Dharma hall with a
roof, which they named Kutagara. A number of smaller buildings were scattered
throughout the forest of sal trees. The princes were the sponsors of the retreat
season with generous contributions from Ambapali.
   Bhikkhus throughout Magadha and as far away as Sakya gathered to spend the
retreat season there with the Buddha. They numbered six hundred in all. Lay
disciples traveled to spend the rainy season there, as well, in order to receive the
Buddha’s teaching. They brought daily food offerings and attended all the
Dharma talks.
   One morning in early autumn just after the retreat came to a close, the Buddha
received news that King Suddhodana was on his deathbed in Kapilavatthu. The


king had sent Prince Mahanama, his nephew, as a messenger to summon the
Buddha in hopes of seeing his son one last time. At Mahanama’s special request,
the Buddha agreed to travel in the carriage in order to save time. Anuruddha,
Nanda, Ananda, and Rahula accompanied him. They left so quickly that even the
Licchavi princes and Ambapali were unable to see them off. After the carriage
departed, two hundred bhikkhus, including all the former princes of the Sakya
clan, began to walk towards Kapilavatthu. They wanted to be with the Buddha at
his father’s funeral.
   The royal family met the Buddha at the palace gates. Mahapajapati led him at
once into the king’s chambers. The king’s face, pale and wan, brightened when
he saw the Buddha. The Buddha sat down by the bed and took the king’s hand in
his own. The king, now eighty-two years old, was thin and frail.
   The Buddha said, “Father, please breathe gently and slowly. Smile. Nothing is
more important than your breath at this moment. Nanda, Ananda, Rahula,
Anuruddha, and I will breathe together with you.”
   The king looked at each one of them. He smiled and began to follow his
breath. No one dared cry. After a moment, the king looked at the Buddha and
said, “I have seen clearly the impermanence of life and how if a person wants
happiness he should not lose himself in a life of desires. Happiness is obtained
by living a life of simplicity and freedom.”
   Queen Gotami told the Buddha, “These past months, the king has lived very
simply. He has truly followed your teaching. Your teaching has transformed the
lives of every one of us here.”
   Still holding the king’s hand, the Buddha said, “Father, take a deep look at me,
at Nanda and Rahula. Look at the green leaves on the branches outside your
window. Life continues. As life continues, so do you. You will continue to live in
me and in Nanda and Rahula, and in all beings. The temporal body arises from
the four elements which dissolve only to endlessly recombine again. Father,
don’t think that because the body passes away, life and death can bind us.
Rahula’s body is also your body.”
   The Buddha motioned to Rahula to come and hold the king’s other hand. A
lovely smile arose on the face of the dying king. He understood the Buddha’s
words and he no longer feared death.
   The king’s advisors and ministers were all present. He motioned for them to
approach and in a feeble voice said, “During my reign, I have doubtlessly upset
and wronged you. Before I die, I ask your forgiveness.”
   The advisors and ministers could not hold back their tears. Prince Mahanama


knelt by the bed and said, “Your majesty, you have been the most virtuous and
just of kings. No one here has any reason to fault you.”
   Mahanama continued, “I humbly wish to suggest that Prince Nanda now leave
monastic life and return to Kapilavatthu to ascend the throne. The people would
all be happy to see your own son as king. I pledge to assist and support him with
all my being.”
   Nanda looked at the Buddha as if to plead for rescue. Queen Gotami also
looked the Buddha’s way. Quietly, the Buddha spoke, “Father, Ministers, please
allow me to share my insight in this matter. Nanda does not yet possess the
inclination or ability to serve as a political ruler. He needs more years of spiritual
practice to be ready for such a task. Rahula is only fifteen years old and too
young to become king. I believe Prince Mahanama is the best qualified to be
king. He is a man of great intelligence and talent, as well as a man of
compassion and understanding. Furthermore, he has served as the king’s chief
advisor these past six years. On behalf of the royal family, on behalf of the
people, I ask Prince Mahanama to accept this difficult responsibility.”
   Mahanama joined his palms and protested, “I fear my talent falls far short of
what is required of a king. Please, your Majesty, Lord Buddha, and Ministers,
choose someone more worthy than myself.”
   The other ministers voiced their approval of the Buddha’s suggestion. The
king nodded his approval, as well, and called Mahanama to his side. He took
Mahanama’s hand and said, “Everyone places his trust in you. The Buddha
himself has faith in you. You are my nephew and I would be honored and happy
to pass the throne onto you. You will continue our line for a hundred
generations.”
   Mahanama bowed, submitting to the king’s wishes.
   The king was overjoyed. “Now I can close my eyes in peace. I am happy to
have seen the Buddha before I left this world. My heart is now without any cares
whatsoever. I have no regrets or bitterness. I hope that the Buddha will rest in
Kapilavatthu for a time in order to assist Mahanama in the first days of his reign.
Your virtue, Lord Buddha, will assure our country a hundred generations of
peace.” The king’s voice faded to barely a whisper.
   The Buddha said, “I will remain here for whatever time is needed to help
Mahanama.”
   The king smiled weakly, but his eyes radiated peace. He closed his eyes and
passed from this life. Queen Gotami and Yasodhara began to cry. The ministers
sobbed in grief. The Buddha folded the king’s hands on his chest and then


motioned for everyone to stop crying. He told them to follow their breathing.
After several moments, he suggested they meet in the outer chamber to discuss
arrangements for the funeral.
   The funeral took place seven days later. More than a thousand brahmans
attended the ceremony. But King Suddhodana’s funeral was made unique by the
presence of five hundred saffron-robed bhikkhus who represented the Way of the
Buddha. In addition to the traditional brahmana prayers and recitations, sutras of
the Way were chanted. The bhikkhus chanted the Four Noble Truths, the Sutra
on Impermanence, the Sutra on Fire, the Sutra on Dependent Co-arising, and the
Three Refuges. They chanted in the tongue of Magadhi, which was spoken by all
the peoples east of the Ganga.
   The Buddha slowly circled the funeral pyre three times. Before he lit the
funeral pyre, he said, “Birth, old age, sickness, and death occur in the life of all
persons. We should reflect on birth, old age, sickness, and death every day in
order to prevent ourselves from becoming lost in desires and in order to be able
to create a life filled with peace, joy, and contentment. A person who has attained
the Way looks on birth, old age, sickness, and death with equanimity. The true
nature of all dharmas is that there is neither birth nor death, neither production
nor destruction, neither increasing nor decreasing.”
   Once lit, flames consumed the pyre. The sound of gongs and drums
intertwined with chanting. The people of Kapilavatthu attended in great numbers
to see the Buddha light the king’s funeral pyre.
   After Mahanama’s coronation, the Buddha remained in Kapilavatthu for three
months. One day Mahapajapati Gotami visited him at Nigrodha Park. She
offered a number of robes and also requested to be ordained as a nun. She said,
“If you will allow women to be ordained, many will benefit. Among our clan,
many princes have left home to become your disciples. Many of them had wives.
Now their wives desire to study the Dharma as nuns. I want to be ordained
myself. It would bring me great joy. This has been my sole desire since the king
died.”
   The Buddha was silent for a long moment before he said, “It is not possible.”
   Lady Pajapati pleaded, “I know this is a difficult issue for you. If you accept
women into the sangha you will be met with protest and resistance from society.
But I do not believe you are afraid of such reactions.”
   Again the Buddha was silent. He said, “In Rajagaha, there are also a number
of women who want to be ordained, but I don’t believe it is the right time yet.
Conditions are not yet ripe to accept women in the sangha.”


   Gotami pleaded three times with him, but his answer remained the same.
Deeply disappointed, she departed. When she returned to the palace she told
Yasodhara of the Buddha’s response.
   A few days later, the Buddha returned to Vesali. After his departure, Gotami
gathered all the women who wished to be ordained. They included a number of
young women who had never been married. All the women belonged to the
Sakya clan. She told them, “I know beyond a doubt that in the Way of
Awakening, all people are equal. Everyone has the capacity to be enlightened
and liberated. The Buddha has said so himself. He has accepted untouchables
into the sangha. There is no reason he should not accept women. We are full
persons too. We can attain enlightenment and liberation. There is no reason to
regard women as inferior.
   “I suggest we shave our heads, get rid of our fine clothes and jewels, put on
the yellow robes of bhikkhus, and walk barefoot to Vesali where we will ask to
be ordained. In this way we will prove to the Buddha and everyone else that we
are capable of living simply and practicing the Way. We will walk hundreds of
miles and beg for our food. This is the only hope we have to be accepted into the
sangha.”
   All the women agreed with Gotami. They saw in her a true leader. Yasodhara
smiled. She had long appreciated Gotami’s strong will. Gotami was not one to be
stopped by any obstacle, as proved by her years of working on behalf of the poor
with Yasodhara. The women agreed on a day to put their plan into action.
   Gotami said to Yasodhara, “Gopa, it would be best if you didn’t come with us
this time. Things may go more smoothly. When we have succeeded, there will be
plenty of time for you to follow.”
   Yasodhara smiled in understanding.


                           Chapter Forty-Five
                             Opening the Door
Early one morning on his way to the lake to get some water, Ananda met Gotami
and fifty other women standing not far from the Buddha’s hut. Every woman had
shaved her head and was wearing a yellow robe. Their feet were swollen and
bloody. At first glance, Ananda thought it was a delegation of monks, but
suddenly he recognized Lady Gotami. Hardly able to believe his eyes, he
blurted, “Good heavens, Lady Gotami! Where have you come from? Why are
your feet so bloody? Why have you and all the ladies come here like this?”
   Gotami answered, “Venerable Ananda, we have shaved our heads and given
away all our fine clothes and jewels. We no longer have any possessions in this
world. We left Kapilavatthu and have walked for fifteen days, sleeping by the
roadsides and begging for our food in small villages along the way. We wish to
show that we are capable of living like bhikkhus. I beseech you, Ananda. Please
speak to the Buddha on our behalf. We wish to be ordained as nuns.”
   Ananda said, “Wait here. I will speak to the Buddha at once. I promise to do
all I can.”
   Ananda entered the Buddha’s hut just as the Buddha was putting on his robe.
Nagita, the Buddha’s assistant at that time, was also present. Ananda told the
Buddha all he had just seen and heard. The Buddha did not say anything.
   Ananda then asked, “Lord, is it possible for a woman to attain the Fruits of
Stream Enterer, Once-Returner, Never-Returner, and Arhatship?”
   The Buddha answered, “Beyond a doubt.”
   “Then why won’t you accept women into the sangha? Lady Gotami nurtured
and cared for you from the time you were an infant. She has loved you like a
son. Now she has shaved her head and renounced all her possessions. She has
walked all the way from Kapilavatthu to prove that women can endure anything
that men can. Please have compassion and allow her to be ordained.”
   The Buddha was silent for a long moment. He then asked Nagita to summon
Venerables Sariputta, Moggallana, Anuruddha, Bhaddiya, Kimbila, and
Mahakassapa. When they arrived, he discussed the situation with them at length.
He explained that it was not discrimination against women which made him


hesitant to ordain them. He was unsure how to open the sangha to women
without creating harmful conflict both within and outside of the sangha.
   After a lengthy exchange of ideas, Sariputta said, “It would be wise to create
statutes which define the roles of nuns within the sangha. Such statutes would
diminish public opposition which is certain to erupt, since there has been
discrimination against women for thousands of years. Please consider the
following eight rules:
   “First, a nun, or bhikkhuni, will always defer to a bhikkhu, even if she is older
or has practiced longer than he has.
   “Second, all bhikkhunis must spend the retreat season at a center within reach
of a center of bhikkhus in order to receive spiritual support and further study.
   “Third, twice a month, the bhikkhunis should delegate someone to invite the
bhikkhus to decide on a date for uposatha, the special day of observance. A
bhikkhu should visit the nuns, teach them, and encourage them in their practice.
   “Fourth, after the rainy season retreat, nuns must attend the Pavarana
ceremony and present an account of their practice, not only before other nuns,
but before the monks.
   “Fifth, whenever a bhikkhuni breaks a precept, she must confess before both
the bhikkhunis and the bhikkhus.
   “Sixth, after a period of practice as a novice, a bhikkhuni will take full vows
before the communities of both monks and nuns.
   “Seventh, a bhikkhuni should not criticize or censure a bhikkhu.
   “Eighth, a bhikkhuni will not give Dharma instruction to a community of
bhikkhus.”
   Moggallana laughed. “These eight rules are clearly discriminatory. How can
you pretend otherwise?”
   Sariputta replied, “The purpose of these rules is to open the door for women to
join the sangha. They are not intended to discriminate but to help end
discrimination. Don’t you see?”
   Moggallana nodded, acknowledging the merit of Sariputta’s statement.
   Bhaddiya said, “These eight rules are necessary. Lady Gotami has
commanded much authority. She is the Lord’s mother. Without rules such as
these, it would be difficult for anyone except the Buddha himself to guide her in
her practice.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda, “Ananda, please go and tell Lady
Mahapajapati that if she is willing to accept these Eight Special Rules, she and
the other women may be ordained.”


   The sun had already climbed high into the sky, but Ananda found Lady
Gotami and the other women patiently waiting. After hearing the Eight Rules,
Gotami was overjoyed. She replied, “Venerable Ananda, please tell the Buddha
that just as a young girl gladly accepts a garland of lotus flowers or roses to
adorn her hair after washing it with perfumed water, I happily accept the Eight
Rules. I will follow them all my life if I am granted permission to be ordained.”
   Ananda returned to the Buddha’s hut and informed him of Lady Gotami’s
response.
   The other women looked at Gotami with concern in their eyes, but she smiled
and reassured them, “Don’t worry, my sisters. The important thing is that we
have earned the right to be ordained. These Eight Rules will not be barriers to
our practice. They are the door by which we may enter the sangha.”
   All fifty-one women were ordained that same day. Venerable Sariputta
arranged for them to live temporarily at Ambapali’s mango grove. The Buddha
also asked Sariputta to teach the nuns the basic practice.
   Eight days later, Bhikkhuni Mahapajapati paid a visit to the Buddha. She said,
“Lord, please show compassion, and explain how I may best make quick
progress on the path of liberation.”
   The Buddha answered, “Bhikkhuni Mahapajapati, the most important thing is
to take hold of your own mind. Practice observing the breath and meditate on the
body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind. Practicing like that, each day you will
experience a deepening of humility, ease, detachment, peace, and joy. When
those qualities arise, you can be sure you are on the correct path, the path of
awakening and enlightenment.”
   Bhikkhuni Mahapajapati wanted to build a convent in Vesali in order to enable
the nuns to dwell close to the Buddha and his senior disciples. She also wanted
later to return to Kapilavatthu to open a convent in her homeland. She sent a
messenger to Yasodhara to announce the good news of the women’s ordination.
Bhikkhuni Gotami knew that the acceptance of women into the sangha would
create an uproar. Bitter opposition would undoubtedly result, and many people
would condemn the Buddha and his sangha. She knew the Buddha would have
to face many difficulties. She was grateful, and understood that the Eight Rules
were temporarily necessary to protect the sangha from harmful conflict. She was
sure that later on, once the ordination of women was an established fact, the
Eight Rules would no longer be necessary.
   The Buddha’s community now had four streams—the bhikkhus, bhikkhunis,
upasakas (male lay disciples), and upasikas (female lay disciples).


  Bhikkhuni Mahapajapati gave careful thought as to how the bhikkhunis
should dress. Her suggestions were all accepted by the Buddha. The bhikkhus
wore three garments—the antaravarsaka or pants, the uttarasangha or inner
robe, and the sanghati or outer robe. In addition to these three garments, the
bhikkhunis added a cloth wrapped around the chest called a samkaksika, and a
skirt called a kusulaka. In addition to their robes and begging bowl, each monk
and nun also had the right to own a fan, a water filter, a needle and thread to
mend their robes, a pick to clean their teeth, and a razor to shave their heads
twice a month.


                              Chapter Forty-Six
                        A Handful of Simsapa Leaves
Venuvana monastery in Rajagaha, Kutagarasala monastery in Vesali, and
Jetavana monastery in Savatthi, had become thriving centers for the practice and
teaching of the Way. Other monastic centers had been founded throughout
Magadha, Kosala, and neighboring kingdoms. Everywhere, the sight of saffron-
robed bhikkhus had become familiar. The Way of Awakening had spread far and
wide in the first six years after the Buddha’s Enlightenment.
   The Buddha spent his sixth rainy season retreat on Makula mountain, and the
seventh season on Samkasya mountain upstream from the Ganga. He spent the
eighth season at Sumsumaragira in Bhagga, and the ninth near Kosambi.
Kosambi was a large town in the kingdom of Vamsa situated along the Jamuna
River. An important monastery had been built there in a large forest called
Ghosira, named after the lay disciple who donated the forest. Senior disciples
such as Mahakassapa, Mahamoggallana, Sariputta, and Mahakaccana were not
with the Buddha during the ninth rainy season retreat at Ghosira. Ananda,
however, was. Rahula remained with Sariputta.
   Ghosira was filled with simsapa trees under which the Buddha liked to
meditate during hot afternoons. One day after his meditation, he returned to the
community holding a handful of simsapa leaves. He held them up and asked the
bhikkhus, “Bhikkhus, which is greater—the number of leaves in my hand or the
number of leaves in the forest?”
   The bhikkhus answered, “The number of leaves in the forest.”
   The Buddha answered, “Just so, what I see is much greater than what I teach.
Why? Because I teach only those things that are truly necessary and helpful in
attaining the Way.”
   The Buddha said this because at Ghosira there were many bhikkhus who
tended to lose themselves in philosophical speculation. Bhikkhu Malunkyaputta
had been especially advised by the Buddha not to entangle himself in esoteric
questions that were not essential for the practice. This was because
Malunkyaputta had a habit of asking the Buddha such questions as whether the
universe was finite or infinite, temporal or eternal. The Buddha always refused


to answer such questions. One day Malunkyaputta felt he could no longer endure
the Buddha’s silence. He resolved that he would ask the Buddha his questions
one last time and if the Buddha still refused to answer him, he would ask to be
relieved of his vows as a bhikkhu.
   He found the Buddha and said, “Teacher, if you will agree to answer my
questions, I will continue to follow you. If you refuse, I will abandon the sangha.
Tell me if you know whether or not the universe is finite or infinite. If you don’t
know the answer, just say so.”
   The Buddha looked at Malunkyaputta and said, “When you asked to be
ordained, did I promise to answer such questions? Did I say, ‘Malunkyaputta,
become a bhikkhu, and I will solve your metaphysical problems?’”
   “No, Lord, you did not.”
   “Then why do you demand me to do so now? Malunkyaputta, you are like a
person shot with a poisoned arrow whose family summons the doctor to have the
arrow removed and the man given an antidote. But the man refuses to let the
doctor do anything before certain questions can be answered. The wounded man
demands to know who shot the arrow, what his caste and job is, and why he shot
him. He wants to know what kind of bow the man used and how he acquired the
ingredients used in preparing the poison. Malunkyaputta, such a man will die
before getting the answers to his questions. It is no different for one who follows
the Way. I teach only those things necessary to realize the Way. Things which are
not helpful or necessary, I do not teach.
   “Malunkyaputta, whether the universe is finite or infinite, temporal or eternal,
there is one truth you must accept, and that is the presence of suffering. Suffering
has causes which can be illuminated in order to be removed. The things I teach
will help you attain detachment, equanimity, peace, and liberation. I refuse to
speak about all those things which are not helpful in realizing the Way.”
   Feeling ashamed, Malunkyaputta asked the Buddha to forgive him for making
such a foolish demand. The Buddha encouraged all the bhikkhus to focus on
their practice and avoid useless philosophical speculation and debate.
   Ghosira, the lay disciple who donated the forest, also sponsored the building
of two other monasteries—Kukuta and Pavarikambavana. A fourth monastery
was also built in the region and called Badarika.
   At Ghosira, as at all the other monasteries, certain bhikkhus were assigned the
task of memorizing the teachings of the Buddha. They were called sutra masters,
as the words of the Buddha were called sutras. One was the Sutra on Turning the
Wheel of Dharma, the discourse given to the Buddha’s five first disciples in the


Deer Park. A few sutras, such as the Sutra on the Nature of the Non-Self, the
Sutra on Dependent Co-arising, and the Sutra on the Noble Eightfold Path, were
memorized and recited twice monthly by the entire community of bhikkhus.
   In addition to sutra masters, there were precept masters, who were expert in
the different precepts for novices and ordained bhikkhus. Rahula and other
novices who had not yet reached twenty years of age followed what were called
the samanera precepts.
   That year at Ghosira, a conflict arose between a sutra master and a precept
master. Their argument stemmed from a small event, but ended up creating a
sharp division in the sangha. A sutra master forgot to clean out the wash basin he
had used and was charged with a violation of a lesser precepts by a precept
master. The sutra master was a proud person and contended that since he had not
intentionally left the basin dirty, he was not to blame. Students of each bhikkhu
took the side of their own teacher, and the argument escalated. One side accused
the other of slander, while the other side accused their opponents of acting
foolishly. Finally, the precept master publicly announced the the sutra master’s
transgression and forbade him from attending the biweekly precepts recitation
ceremony until he formally confessed before the sangha.
   The situation grew more and more intense. Both sides spoke ill of each other.
Their words flew like poisoned arrows. Most of the other bhikkhus took sides,
although naturally there were some who refused to take either side. They said,
“This is terrible! This will only create harmful division in the sangha.”
   Though the Buddha was residing not far from the monastery, he was unaware
of the conflict until a delegation of concerned bhikkhus visited him, told him of
it, and asked him to intervene. The Buddha went to meet directly with the
precept master and told him, “We should not become too attached to our own
viewpoint. We should listen carefully in order to understand the other’s
viewpoint. We should seek all means to prevent the community from breaking.”
Then he went to the sutra master and said the same things. Returning to his hut,
he was hopeful the two men would reconcile.
   But the Buddha’s intervention did not have the desired effect. Too many ill
words had already been spoken. Many wounds had been inflicted. The bhikkhus
who remained impartial did not possess enough influence to bring the two sides
together. The conflict reached the ears of the lay disciples, and before long, even
other religious sects had heard of the trouble in the Buddha’s sangha. It was a
serious blow to the integrity of the sangha. Nagita, the Buddha’s attendant, was
unable to endure the situation anymore. He discussed the matter again with the


Buddha, beseeching him to intervene once more.
   The Buddha put on his outer robe and went at once to the monastery’s meeting
hall. Nagita rang the bell to summon the community. When all were present, the
Buddha said, “Please cease your arguing. It is only creating division in the
community. Please return to your practice. If we truly follow our practice, we
will not become victims of pride and anger.”
   One bhikkhu stood up and said, “Master, please don’t involve yourself in this
matter. Return and dwell peacefully in your meditation. This matter does not
concern you. We are adults and capable of resolving this on our own.”
   Dead silence followed the bhikkhu’s words. The Buddha stood up and left the
meeting hall. He returned to his hut, picked up his bowl, and walked down into
Kosambi to beg. When he was finished begging, he entered the forest to eat
alone. Then he stood up and walked out of Kosambi. He headed for the river. He
did not tell anyone of his departure, not even his attendant, Nagita, or Venerable
Ananda.
   The Buddha walked until he reached the town of Balakalonakaragama. There
he met his disciple, the Venerable Bhagu. Bhagu invited him into the forest
where he dwelled alone. He offered the Buddha a towel and wash basin to wash
his face and hands. The Buddha asked Bhagu how his practice was going. Bhagu
replied that he found great ease and joy in the practice, even though he was
presently dwelling all alone. The Buddha remarked, “Sometimes it is more
pleasant to live alone than with many people.”
   After bidding Bhagu farewell, the Buddha headed for Eastern Bamboo Forest,
which was not far way. As he was about to enter the forest, the groundskeeper
stopped him and said, “Monk, don’t go in there or you may disturb the monks
already practicing in there.”
   Before the Buddha could think of a response, Venerable Anuruddha appeared.
He happily greeted the Buddha and said to the groundskeeper, “This is my own
teacher. Please allow him to enter.”
   Anuruddha led the Buddha into the forest where he lived with two other
bhikkhus, Nandiya and Kimbila. They were very happy to see the Buddha.
Nandiya took the Buddha’s bowl and Kimbila took his outer robe. They cleared
a place for him to sit by a thicket of gold bamboo. They brought a towel and
wash basin. The three bhikkhus joined their palms and bowed to the Buddha.
The Buddha asked them to be seated and he asked, “Are you content here? How
is your practice going? Do you encounter any difficulties in begging or sharing
the teaching in this region?”


   Anuruddha answered, “Lord, we are very content here. It is calm and
peaceful. We receive ample food offerings and are able to share the Dharma. We
are all making progress in our practice.”
   The Buddha asked, “Do you live in harmony with one another?”
   Anuruddha said, “Lord, we care deeply for each other. We live in harmony
like milk and honey. I consider living with Nandiya and Kimbila a great
blessing. I treasure their friendship. Before I say or do anything, whether they
are present or not, I stop and ask myself what their reaction would be. Would my
words or actions disappoint my brothers in any way? If I feel any doubts, I
refrain from the words or actions intended. Lord, although we are three persons,
we are also one.”
   The Buddha nodded his approval. He looked at the other two bhikkhus.
Kimbila said, “Anuruddha speaks the truth. We live in harmony and care deeply
for each other.”
   Nandiya added, “We share all things, from our food to our insight and
experience.”
   The Buddha praised them, “Excellent! I am most pleased to see how you live
in harmony. A sangha is only a true sangha when such harmony exists. You have
experienced real awakening and that is why you have realized such harmony.”
   The Buddha spent one month with the three bhikkhus. He observed how they
went begging every morning after meditation. Whichever bhikkhu returned first
from begging always prepared a place for the others to sit, gathered water for
washing, and set out an empty bowl. Before he ate anything himself, he would
place some of his food into the empty bowl in case one of his brothers had not
received any food. After they had all finished eating, they placed any leftover
food on the ground or in the stream, careful not to harm any creatures that lived
there. Then they washed their bowls together.
   Whoever saw that the toilet needed scrubbing did it at once. They joined
together to do any tasks that required more than one person. They sat down
regularly to share insights and experiences.
   Before the Buddha left the three bhikkhus, he spoke to them, “Bhikkhus, the
very nature of a sangha is harmony. I believe harmony can be realized by
following these principles:
   “1. Sharing a common space such as a forest or home.
   “2. Sharing the essentials of daily life together.
   “3. Observing the precepts together.
   “4. Using only words that contribute to harmony, avoiding all words that can


cause the community to break.
   “5. Sharing insights and understanding together.
   “6. Respecting others’ viewpoints and not forcing another to follow your own
viewpoint.
   “A sangha that follows these principles will have happiness and harmony.
Bhikkhus, let us always observe these six principles.”
   The bhikkhus were happy to receive this teaching from the Buddha. The
Buddha bid them farewell and walked until he reached Rakkhita Forest, near
Parileyyaka. After sitting in meditation beneath a lush sal tree, he decided to
spend the approaching rainy season alone in the forest.


                           Chapter Forty-Seven
                               Follow the Dharma
Beneath the sal tree, the Buddha enjoyed ease, peace, and joy. It was a lovely
forest of green hills, clear springs, and a lake. The Buddha enjoyed the solitude.
He thought of the bhikkhus in Kosambi living in conflict. Even the lay disciples
had been disturbed. He felt sad that the bhikkhus were unwilling to listen to his
guidance, but he understood that their minds were clouded by anger.
   The Buddha encountered many animals in Rakkhita Forest, including a family
of elephants. The eldest female, the matriarch queen, often led the younger
elephants to the lake to bathe. She taught them how to drink the cool water and
eat water lilies. The Buddha watched how she grasped a bunch of lilies with her
trunk and rinsed them in the water in order to shake off any mud still clinging to
them. The little elephants imitated her.
   The elephants grew fond of the Buddha and became his friends. Sometimes
the queen picked fruit and offered it to the Buddha. The Buddha liked to pat the
heads of the elephant calves, and he often walked with them down to the lake.
He liked to listen to the queen’s majestic call. It sounded like a great trumpet. He
practiced until he could imitate her call perfectly. Once when the queen called
out, he also gave a great trumpeting call. She gazed at him and then came and
knelt before him as if to bow. The Buddha gently stroked her head.
Sometimes the elephant queen picked fruit and offered it to the Buddha.


   It was the tenth retreat season since the Buddha’s Enlightenment, but only the
second one he had spent alone. He stayed in that cool forest the entire retreat
season, leaving only briefly in the mornings to beg. When the rainy season came
to an end, the Buddha departed from his elephant friends and headed northeast.
After two weeks of walking, he reached Jetavana Monastery in Savatthi.
Sariputta was most happy to see him, as was Rahula. Several senior disciples
were also there including Mahamoggallana, Mahakassapa, Mahakaccara, Upali,
Mahakotthiya, Mahakappina, Mahakunda, Revata, and Devadatta. Anuruddha,
Kimbila, and Nandiya had also traveled to Jetavana from their bamboo grove in
Karagama. Even Bhikkhuni Gotami was in Savatthi. Everyone rejoiced to see


the Buddha.
   When he entered his hut at Jetavana, the Buddha found Ananda tidying up and
sweeping the floor. A year and four months had passed since the Buddha had last
been there. Ananda put down his broom and bowed. The Buddha asked him
about the situation in Kosambi, and Ananda replied, “After your departure, a
number of brothers came to me and said, ‘Brother, the Master has left. He is all
alone. Why don’t you follow him and act as his assistant? If you won’t go, we
will go ourselves.’ But I told them, ‘If the Buddha has departed without telling
anyone, it is because he wants to be alone. We should not bother him.’ Six
months later, the same brothers came to me and said, ‘Brother, it has been a long
time since we received any direct teaching from the Buddha. We want to search
for him.’ This time I agreed, and we set out looking for you, but without success.
No one knew where you were. At last we made our way to Savatthi, but you
were not here, either. We decided to wait here, knowing that eventually you
would come. We were confident you would not abandon your disciples.”
   “When you left Kosambi, what was the situation like? Were the bhikkhus still
divided?”
   “Lord, the conflict became even worse. Neither side would have anything to
do with the other. The atmosphere was tense and uncomfortable. Lay disciples
expressed their dismay to the rest of us when we went begging in the city. We
explained that many of us refused to take sides. Little by little, the lay disciples
decided to take matters more into their own hands. They came to the monastery
and spoke to the bhikkhus involved in the conflict. They said things like, ‘You
made the Buddha so sad he left. You bear a grave responsibility. You have
caused many lay disciples to lose trust in the sangha. Please reconsider your
actions.’ At first the bhikkhus involved in the conflict did not pay attention to the
lay disciples. But then the lay disciples decided not to offer food to any bhikkhu
involved in the conflict. They said, ‘You are not worthy of the Buddha because
you are unable to live in harmony. If you listened to the Buddha’s teaching, you
would reconcile with one another and then go find the Buddha and make a
confession. Only by doing so can you regain our trust.’ Lord, the lay disciples
stood their ground. The day I left Kosambi, the two sides had agreed to meet
together. I am sure that before long they will come here to make a formal
confession.”
   The Buddha picked up the broom which Ananda had set down. “Let me do
that. Please find Sariputta and tell him I would like to speak with him.”
   The Buddha leisurely swept the hut and then sat on one of his bamboo chairs


outside. Jetavana was truly beautiful. The trees were covered with new leaves.
Birds sang throughout the forest. Sariputta appeared and sat silently beside the
Buddha for a long, peaceful moment.
   The Buddha told Sariputta what was on his mind. “We should do everything
we can to prevent useless conflicts from arising in this beautiful monastery.”
   They spoke on this matter for a long time.
   One afternoon soon after, Venerable Sariputta received news that the bhikkhus
from Kosambi were on their way to the monastery, having already arrived in
Savatthi. Sariputta went to the Buddha and asked him, “The brothers from
Kosambi will soon arrive. How should we handle the situation?”
   The Buddha replied, “Handle it according to the Dharma.”
   “Can you explain what you mean more clearly?”
   “You, Sariputta, can still ask such a question?”
   Sariputta fell silent. Just then Moggallana, Kassapa, Kaccana, Kotthiya,
Kappina, and Anuruddha appeared. They, too, asked, “How should we handle
the arrival of the brothers from Kosambi?”
   They all looked at Sariputta but he only smiled. The Buddha looked at his
senior disciples and said, “Listen carefully to both sides without prejudice.
Carefully consider everything you hear to determine which things are in accord
with the teaching and which things are not. Things in accord with the teaching
lead to peace, joy, and liberation. They are the things I myself practice. Things I
have cautioned against and which I do not practice are not in accord with the
teaching. When you understand what things are in accord with the teaching and
what things are not, you will know how to help both sides find reconciliation.”
   At that moment, a number of lay patrons led by Anathapindika arrived at the
Buddha’s hut. They said, “Lord, the bhikkhus from Kosambi have arrived. How
should we receive them? Should we give both sides food offerings?”
   The Buddha smiled. “Offer food to both sides. Express your support of the
sangha. Offer your praise when any of them say things in accord with the
Dharma.”
   Ananda returned and announced to Sariputta that the bhikkhus from Kosambi
were already at the monastery gates. Sariputta turned to the Buddha and asked,
“Shall we let them enter now?”
   The Buddha said, “Open the gates and welcome them.”
   Sariputta said, “I will arrange places for them all to sleep.”
   “Let the two sides dwell in separate locations for the time being.”
   “We may have difficulty finding adequate places for everyone to sleep.”


   “We can endure crowded conditions for now. But don’t make any of the elders
sleep outdoors. Distribute food and medicine equally to all.”
   Sariputta issued orders for the gates to be opened. The Kosambi bhikkhus
were given places to sleep and provided with basic necessities.
   The following morning, the newly arrived bhikkhus were told to go out
begging as usual. Sariputta divided them into groups and sent them to different
locales as the Buddha had counselled. That evening the bhikkhus asked Sariputta
to arrange a meeting with the Buddha in order for them to make a confession.
Sariputta said, “Making a confession to the Buddha is not the most important
thing. You must first achieve true reconciliation. Only if reconciliation has taken
place will the ceremony of confession have meaning.”
   That night the sutra master, responsible for starting the conflict by his refusal
to be corrected, went to the precept master. He joined his palms and bowed.
Then he knelt in front of the precept master and said, “Venerable, I accept that I
violated a precept. It was proper for you to correct me. I am ready to make
confession before the sangha.”
   The sutra master knew that the only way to resolve the conflict was to
swallow his pride. The precept master responded by kneeling before the sutra
master and saying, “I confess that I, too, lacked humility and tact. Please accept
my sincere apologies.”
   Late that night a confession ceremony was held for the sutra master. Everyone
gave a sigh of relief, especially the Kosambi bhikkhus who had remained
impartial throughout the conflict. It was after midnight when Sariputta informed
the Buddha that reconciliation had finally taken place. The Buddha nodded
silently. The conflict was ended, but he knew that it would take time for all the
wounds to heal.


                            Chapter Forty-Eight
                          Covering Mud with Straw
Venerable Moggallana suggested a meeting take place between the Buddha’s
senior disciples at Jetavana and the principal instigators of the Kosambi conflict.
The goal of the meeting was to learn from the experience in order to come up
with ways to prevent such conflicts from taking place again. Venerable
Mahakassapa presided over the meeting.
   To begin the meeting, Mahakassapa asked Anuruddha to repeat the six
principles of harmonious living that the Buddha had expounded during his stay
at Eastern Bamboo Forest. After hearing Anuruddha explain the six principles,
Moggallana suggested that bhikkhus and bhikkhunis in all monastic centers be
asked to memorize them.
   After four days of discussion, the bhikkhus in the meeting formulated seven
practices of reconciliation to be used to settle disputes within the sangha. They
named these seven methods Saptadhikarana-samatha:
   The first practice is sammukha-vinaya, or Face-to-Face Sitting. According to
this practice, the dispute must be stated before the entire convocation of
bhikkhus, with both sides of the conflict present. This is to avoid private
conversations about the conflict which inevitably influence people against one
side or the other, creating further discord and tension.
   The second practice is smrti-vinaya, or Remembrance. In the convocation,
both parties involved try to remember from the beginning everything that led up
to the conflict. Details should be presented with as much clarity as possible.
Witnesses and evidence should be provided, if available. The community listens
quietly and patiently to both sides in order to obtain adequate information to
examine the dispute.
   The third practice is amudha-vinaya, or Non-stubbornness. The monks in
question are expected to resolve the conflict. The community expects both
parties to demonstrate their willingness to reach reconciliation. Stubbornness is
to be considered negative and counterproductive. In case a party claims he
violated a precept because of ignorance or an unsettled state of mind, without
actually intending to violate it, the community should take that into account in


order to find a solution that is agreeable to both sides.
   The fourth practice is tatsvabhaisya-vinaya, or Voluntary Confession. Each
party is encouraged to admit his own transgressions and shortcomings without
having to be prodded by the other party or the community. The community
should allow each party ample time to confess his own failings, no matter how
minor they may seem. Admitting one’s own faults begins a process of
reconciliation and encourages the other party to do likewise. This leads to the
possibility of full reconciliation.
   The fifth practice is pratijñakaraka-vinaya, or Accepting the Verdict. When
the verdict is reached, jñapticaturthinkarmavacana, it will be read aloud three
times. If no one in the community voices disagreement with it, it is considered
final. Neither party in dispute has the right to challenge the verdict. They have
agreed to place their trust in the community’s decision and carry out whatever
verdict the community reaches.
   The sixth practice is yadbhuyasikiya-vinaya, or Decision by Consensus. After
hearing both sides and being assured of the wholehearted efforts by both sides to
reach a settlement, the community reaches a verdict by consensus.
   The seventh practice is trnastaraka-vinaya, or Covering Mud with Straw.
During the convocation, a venerable elder monk is appointed to represent each
side in the conflict. These are high monks who are deeply respected and listened
to by others in the sangha. They sit and listen intently, saying little. But when
they do speak, their words carry special weight. Their words have the capacity to
soothe and heal wounds, to call forth reconciliation and forgiveness, just as straw
covers mud, enabling someone to cross it without dirtying his clothes. Thanks to
the presence of these elder bhikkhus, the disputing parties find it easier to release
petty concerns. Bitterness is eased and the community is able to reach a verdict
agreeable to both sides.
   The Buddha’s senior disciples submitted the Seven Practices of Reconciliation
for his approval. He praised their work and agreed that the practices should
become part of the formal precepts.
   The Buddha remained at Jetavana for six months before returning to
Rajagaha. He stopped to visit the bodhi tree on the way and entered Uruvela to
visit Svasti’s family. Svasti was twenty-one years old. The Buddha had returned
to fulfill his promise to welcome Svasti into the sangha when he was old enough.
Svasti was ordained and fast became Rahula’s closest friend.


                            Chapter Forty-Nine
                                 Earth’s Lessons
Svasti listened with great interest to all that Assaji and Ananda recounted about
the Buddha’s efforts to spread the Dharma. Bhikkhuni Gotami and Rahula
listened intently too. Ananda’s memory was truly phenomenal. He filled in many
details that Assaji forgot to mention. Svasti was grateful to both bhikkhus, and to
Bhikkhuni Gotami and novice Rahula. Thanks to them he learned much about
the Buddha’s life he could never have learned otherwise. Svasti hoped that he
would always be able to live close by the Buddha in order to witness his life and
receive his teachings directly.
   Thanks to Sujata, even though Svasti was an untouchable buffalo boy, he had
learned the basics of a young man’s education. But his lessons with her had
ended several years ago when she left Uruvela to marry a man in the village of
Nadika. Svasti knew that he could learn a great deal from Rahula. He found
Rahula’s bearing full of gentle dignity. Not only was Rahula from a noble caste,
but he had spent the past eight years living in the serene and concentrated
atmosphere of the sangha. Compared to Rahula, Svasti felt rough and awkward.
But his feelings caused him to devote great efforts to his practice. Sariputta
asked Rahula to show Svasti basic practices such as putting on the robe, holding
the begging bowl, walking, standing, lying down, sitting, eating, washing,
listening to Dharma talks, all in mindfulness. A bhikkhu memorized and paid
diligent attention to forty-five practices, all of which helped to deepen his focus
and serenity.
   In principle, Rahula was still only a novice, a samanera. He had to wait until
he was twenty years old to take full vows. A samanera had ten precepts—do not
kill, do not steal, do not engage in sexual relations, do not speak falsehoods, do
not drink alcohol, do not wear jewelry, flowers, or perfume, do not sit or lie
down on any wide, high, or fancy bed, do not participate in secular dancing and
singing parties, do not handle money, and do not eat past the noon hour. The
forty-five practices were followed by ordained bhikkhus, but Rahula was
expected to study and observe them in preparation for his full vows. A bhikkhu
observed one hundred twenty precepts, which included the forty-five practices.


Rahula told Svasti that additional precepts would probably be added, and that he
had heard they might well number two hundred or more in time.
   Rahula explained to Svasti that in the first years of the sangha, there were no
precepts. Ordination was simple. A person had only to kneel at the feet of the
Buddha or another bhikkhu and recite the three refuges three times. It became
necessary to create and enforce precepts as the sangha grew, because in so large
a community, there were bhikkhus who needed rules and guidelines in order to
better discipline themselves.
   Rahula told Svasti that the first person to violate the spirit of the sangha was a
bhikkhu named Sudina. It was because of Sudina that the Buddha created the
first precepts. Before he was ordained, Sudina was married and lived in the
village Kalanda on the outskirts of Vesali. When he heard the Buddha teach, he
asked to be ordained. Shortly after that, he had a chance to return to Kalanda.
His family invited him for a meal in their home and he consented. His family
implored him to return to secular life and help run the family business. He
refused. His parents complained because Sudina was their only child, and they
had no one to inherit the business. They feared that the family’s wealth would
fall into someone else’s hands. Seeing Sudina’s determination to remain a
bhikkhu, his mother suggested that the least he could do was to leave a child as
an heir. Persuaded by his mother’s pleas, and without precepts to guide him, he
agreed to meet with his former wife in Mahavana Forest. His wife conceived and
gave birth to a boy they named Bijaka, which means “seed.” Sudina’s friends
taunted him by calling him “Seed’s father.” The reputation of the sangha was
tarnished. The Buddha called the bhikkhus together and chastised Sudina.
Because of this incident, formal precepts were instituted. It was decided that
whenever a bhikkhu violated the spirit of the Way of Enlightenment and
Liberation, a convocation would be called and a new precept added. The
precepts were called Patimokkha.
   Four precepts were considered cardinal. The violation of any one of these four
resulted in being expelled from the community. All the other precepts could be
forgiven by making confession. The four cardinal precepts were—do not engage
in sexual relations, do not steal, do not kill, and do not claim to have attained
insight you have not actually attained. These four precepts were called parajika.
   Rahula also told Svasti that the Buddha had never treated him with special
favors even though his father dearly loved him. He recalled how, at the age of
eleven, he told a fib to Sariputta because he was afraid of being scolded for
running off and playing when he had other duties. He ended up having to tell


four fibs in a row for fear that Sariputta would uncover the truth. But as is almost
always the case, the truth came out. The Buddha used this occasion to teach
Rahula how important it was always to tell the truth.
   At that time Sariputta and Rahula dwelled in Ambalatthika Park, not far from
Bamboo Forest, where the Buddha was staying. One day the Buddha paid them a
visit. Rahula set out a chair for him and brought him a basin of water to wash his
hands and feet. When the Buddha was finished washing, he poured out most of
the water in the basin. He looked at Rahula and asked, “Rahula, is there a little
or a lot of water in this basin?”
Rahula set out a chair for the Buddha and brought him a basin of water to wash
his feet.


   Rahula answered, “There is very little left.”
   The Buddha said, “You should know, Rahula, that a person who does not tell
the truth has as little integrity left as the water in this basin.”
   Rahula was silent. The Buddha poured out the remaining water and asked his
son, “Rahula, do you see how I have emptied all the water out?”
   “Yes, I see.”
   “Those who continue to tell untruths lose all their integrity just as this basin
has lost all its water.”
   The Buddha turned the basin upside down and asked Rahula, “Do you see
how this basin is turned upside down?”


   “Yes, I see. ”
   “If we don’t practice correct speech, our integrity is turned upside down just
like this basin. Don’t tell fibs even in jest. Rahula, do you know why one uses a
mirror?”
   “Yes, a mirror is used to look at one’s reflection.”
   “Just so, Rahula. Regard your own actions, thoughts, and words just as a
person looks into a mirror.”
   Rahula’s story made Svasti more deeply aware of the importance of right
speech. He could recall times he had fibbed to his parents, and even once to
Sujata. He was thankful he had never lied to the Buddha. Actually, it seemed
impossible to lie to the Buddha. Even if someone did, the Buddha would surely
be able to tell. Svasti thought to himself, “I will resolve always to speak the truth
to everyone I meet, even the smallest child. This will be the way I can show my
gratitude to the Buddha for all he has done for me. I will observe the precepts
diligently.”
   Twice a month, on new moon and full moon days, the bhikkhus gathered to
recite the precepts. Each precept was read aloud and then the community was
asked if anyone had failed to keep that precept. If no one spoke, the next precept
was read. If someone had violated the precept, he stood and made a confession
to the community. With the exception of the four parajika, confession was
enough to make amends.
   On many days, Svasti was asked to join the Buddha’s group for begging,
joined by Sariputta and Rahula. That retreat season they dwelled in the hills near
the town of Ekanala, south of Rajagaha. One afternoon as the bhikkhus passed
by rice fields near Ekanala, they were stopped by a wealthy farmer from a noble
caste named Bharadvaja. He owned several thousand acres. It was the season for
plowing, and he was out directing the efforts of hundreds of laborers. When he
saw the Buddha pass by, he stood directly in his way and said with some
contempt, “We are farmers. We plow, sow seeds, fertilize, tend, and harvest
crops in order to eat. You do nothing. You produce nothing, yet you still eat. You
are useless. You don’t plow, sow, fertilize, tend, or harvest.”
   The Buddha responded, “Oh, but we do. We plow, sow, fertilize, tend, and
harvest.”
   “Then where are your plows, your buffaloes, and your seeds? What crops do
you tend? What crops do you harvest?”
   The Buddha answered, “We sow the seeds of faith in the earth of a true heart.
Our plow is mindfulness and our buffalo is diligent practice. Our harvest is love


and understanding. Sir, without faith, understanding, and love, life would be
nothing but suffering.”
   Bharadvaja found himself unexpectedly moved by the Buddha’s words. He
asked an attendant to bring the Buddha fragrant rice simmered in milk, but the
Buddha refused by saying, “I have not shared these things with you in order to
be given food. If you would like to make an offering, please do so at another
time.”
   The landowner was so impressed by this that he prostrated himself before the
Buddha and asked to be accepted as a lay disciple. Svasti witnessed this take
place firsthand. He understood how much he could learn by remaining close to
the Buddha’s side. He knew that of the several thousand bhikkhus in the
Buddha’s sangha, few had the good fortune to be as close to the Buddha as he
himself was.
   After the retreat season, the Buddha traveled northwest to spread the Dharma.
He returned to Savatthi at the end of autumn. One morning when they were out
begging, Rahula strayed from mindfulness. Although he continued to walk in
file, his mind was elsewhere. He gazed at the Buddha ahead of him and
wondered what the Buddha would have become if he had not followed the
spiritual path. If he had become a mighty emperor, what would Rahula himself
be now? Thinking such thoughts, Rahula forgot to observe his breathing and
steps. Even though the Buddha could not see Rahula, he knew his son had lost
his mindfulness. The Buddha stopped and turned around. The other bhikkhus
came to a halt. The Buddha looked at Rahula and said, “Rahula, are you
observing your breath and maintaining mindfulness?”
   Rahula lowered his head.
   The Buddha said, “To dwell in mindfulness, you must continue to observe
your breath. We practice meditation even as we beg. Continue to meditate on the
impermanent and non-self nature of the aggregates which comprise all beings.
The five aggregates are the body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and
consciousness. Observe your breath and thoughts, and your mind will not
become dispersed.”
   The Buddha turned back around and continued to walk. His words served as a
reminder to all the bhikkhus to maintain their mindfulness. But a few steps after
that, Rahula abandoned the line of bhikkhus and entered the forest where he sat
alone beneath a tree. Svasti followed him, but Rahula looked up at him and said,
“Please go begging with the others. I don’t have the heart to go begging right
now. The Buddha corrected me before the entire community. I feel so ashamed,


I’d rather sit here alone and meditate.” Seeing he was unable to help his friend,
Svasti rejoined the other bhikkhus.
   On the walk back to the monastery, Venerable Sariputta and Svasti stopped in
the forest to invite Rahula to walk back with them. At the monastery, Svasti
shared half of his food with Rahula, and when they finished eating, Sariputta
told Rahula that the Buddha wished to see him. Svasti was permitted to
accompany him.
   The Buddha understood that Rahula was ripe to receive certain teachings. He
said, “Rahula, learn from the earth. Whether people spread pure and fragrant
flowers, perfume, or fresh milk on it, or discard filthy and foul-smelling feces,
urine, blood, mucus, and spit on it, the earth receives it all equally without
clinging or aversion. When pleasant or unpleasant thoughts arise, don’t let them
entangle or enslave you.
   “Learn from the water, Rahula. When people wash dirty things in it, the water
is not sad or disdainful. Learn from fire. Fire burns all things without
discrimination. It is not ashamed to burn impure substances. Learn from the air.
The air carries all fragrances whether sweet or foul.
   “Rahula, practice loving kindness to overcome anger. Loving kindness has the
capacity to bring happiness to others without demanding anything in return.
Practice compassion to overcome cruelty. Compassion has the capacity to
remove the suffering of others without expecting anything in return. Practice
sympathetic joy to overcome hatred. Sympathetic joy arises when one rejoices
over the happiness of others and wishes others well-being and success. Practice
non-attachment to overcome prejudice. Non-attachment is the way of looking at
all things openly and equally. This is because that is. That is because this is.
Myself and other are not separate. Do not reject one thing only to chase after
another.
   “Rahula, loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and non-attachment
are beautiful and profound states of mind. I call them the Four Immeasurables.
Practice them and you will become a refreshing source of vitality and happiness
for others.
   “Rahula, meditate on impermanence in order to break through the illusion of
self. Meditate on the nature of the body’s birth, development, and death in order
to free yourself from desires. Practice observing your breath. Mindfulness of the
breath brings great joy.”
   Svasti was happy to be sitting next to Rahula, listening to all the Buddha had
to say. Though Svasti had memorized sutras such as Turning the Wheel of


Dharma and the Nature of Non-Self, he felt that he had never tasted the subtle
flavor of the Dharma as deeply as today. Perhaps it was because he had not heard
the other sutras spoken directly by the Buddha. The first sutra he had heard
directly was the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes. But at that time he was not
yet ripe enough to grasp many of its deeper meanings. He promised himself that
during his free time he would recite all the sutras using his newly gained insight.
   That day, the Buddha also spent time teaching the the two young men various
methods of observing the breath. Though Svasti and Rahula had received similar
instruction before, this was the first time they received it directly from the
Buddha. The Buddha told them that the first fruit of mindfully observing the
breath was overcoming dispersion and forgetfulness.
   “Breathing in, you are aware that you are breathing in. Breathing out, you are
aware that you are breathing out. During such moments of breathing practice,
focus your mind on nothing but your breath. Useless and scattered thoughts will
cease, allowing your mind to dwell in mindfulness. When you are aware of your
breathing, you dwell in mindfulness. Dwelling in mindfulness, you cannot be led
astray by any thoughts. With just one breath, you can attain awakening. That
awakening is the Buddha-nature that exists in all beings.
   “Breathing in a short breath, you know that you are breathing in a short
breath. Breathing out a long breath, you know that you are breathing out a long
breath. Be totally aware of each breath. Mindfully observing your breathing will
help you build concentration. With concentration, you will be able to look deeply
into the nature of your body, feelings, mind, and the objects of mind which are
called sarvadharma.”
   The Buddha had taught them wholeheartedly. His words were simple but
profound. Svasti was confident that, thanks to this special session with the
Buddha, he would find it easier to maintain mindfulness of breathing and
therefore would be able to make greater progress in his practice. After bowing to
the Buddha, Svasti and Rahula walked to the lake together. They repeated to
each other all the things the Buddha had taught them in order to remember them
well.


                                Chapter Fifty
                              A Handful of Bran
The following year the Buddha spent the retreat season in Vejanra with five
hundred bhikkhus. Sariputta and Moggallana served as his assistants. Halfway
into the retreat season, drought hit the area, and the heat was almost unbearable.
The Buddha spent most of each day beneath the refreshing shade of a nimba
tree. He ate, gave Dharma talks, meditated, and slept beneath this same tree.
   By the beginning of the third month of retreat, the bhikkhus were receiving
fewer and smaller food offerings. Food was scarce because of the drought, and
even the food reserves maintained by the government for difficult times had
dwindled to almost nothing. Many monks returned to the monastery with empty
bowls. The Buddha himself often returned from begging with an empty bowl,
and he filled his stomach with water to ease the hunger. The bhikkhus grew thin
and wan. Venerable Moggallana suggested they all move south to Uttarakuru for
the remaining days of the retreat, where food would be easier to find, but the
Buddha refused, saying, “Moggallana, we are not the only ones suffering. All the
local people, with the exception of a few wealthy households, are suffering from
hunger. We should not abandon the people now. We have a chance to share and
understand their suffering. We should remain here until the end of the retreat
season.”
   The wealthy merchant, Agnidatta, had invited the Buddha and his bhikkhus
for the retreat season in Vejanra, after he heard the Buddha teach. But he was
away on business and had no idea of the situation back home.
   One day Moggallana pointed to a glade of healthy green trees and grasses
growing near the monastery and said to the Buddha, “Teacher, I believe those
plants have remained fresh and strong thanks to the rich nutrients in the soil. We
could dig up some of that rich humus and mix it with water to make a nutritious
food for the bhikkhus.”
   The Buddha said, “It would not be correct to do so, Moggallana. In fact, I
tried doing just that during my days of self-mortification on Dangsiri mountain,
but I noticed no nutritional benefits. Many living beings live in the soil protected
from the heat of the sun. If we dig up the ground, many of those creatures will


die, and plants will be killed also.” Moggallana said no more.
   It had long been monastic custom for bhikkhus to place a portion of the food
offerings they received into an empty receptacle set out to provide food for
bhikkhus who did not receive adequate food offerings. Svasti noticed that in the
past ten days, the receptacle had remained empty of even a grain of rice or piece
of chappati. Rahula privately confided to Svasti that although no bhikkhu was
receiving adequate food, the people tended to offer food first to the elder
bhikkhus. Younger bhikkhus received little or nothing. Svasti had noticed the
same. He said, “Even on days when I receive a little food, I still feel hungry after
I eat it. Is it the same for you?”
   Rahula nodded. He found it difficult to sleep at night because of his hunger.
   One day after returning from begging, Venerable Ananda placed an
earthenware pot on a three-legged outdoor stove. He gathered some pieces of
wood and began to build a fire. Svasti came to see what he was doing and
offered to tend the fire. Svasti was more skilled at such matters, anyway. In no
time at all, he had a fine fire blazing. Ananda lifted his begging bowl and poured
something that looked like sawdust into the pot. He said, “This is bran. We can
roast it until it is fragrant and then offer it to the Buddha.”
   Svasti stirred the bran with two small sticks while Ananda told him how he
met a horse merchant who had recently arrived in Vejanra with five hundred
horses. Because the merchant saw the plight of the bhikkhus, he told Ananda
that anytime the bhikkhus were unable to receive food offerings, they could
come to his stables and he would offer each bhikkhu a handful of the bran he
used to feed his horses. That day he offered two handfuls to Ananda, one meant
for the Buddha. Ananda promised he would announce the merchant’s generous
offer to the other bhikkhus.
   The bran was soon toasted and fragrant. Ananda scooped it back into the
begging bowl and invited Svasti to accompany him on the walk to the nimba
tree. Ananda offered the bran to the Buddha. The Buddha asked Svasti if he had
received any food offerings, and Svasti showed him the sweet potato he had
been lucky enough to receive. The Buddha invited them to sit down and eat with
him. He lifted his bowl with great reverence. Svasti held his potato mindfully in
his hand. As he watched the Buddha scoop up the bran and eat it with grateful
appreciation, he felt like weeping.
   After the Dharma talk that day, Venerable Ananda told the community about
the horse merchant’s offer. Ananda asked them to visit the stables only when
they had received no food offerings at all, as the bran was meant for the horses


and he didn’t want them to go hungry.
    That night beneath the moon, Sariputta paid a visit to the Buddha sitting
beneath the nimba tree. He said, “Lord, the Way of Awakening is so wondrous!
It has the capacity to transform everyone who hears, understands, and practices
it. Lord, how can we assure that the Way will continue to be transmitted after
you are gone?”
    “Sariputta, if the bhikkhus grasp the true meaning of sutras and practice what
the sutras teach, if they sincerely follow the precepts, the Way of Liberation will
continue for centuries.”
    “Lord, great numbers of bhikkhus diligently memorize and recite the sutras. If
future generations of monks continue to study and recite the teachings, your
loving kindness and your insight will surely extend far into the future.”
    “Sariputta, transmitting the sutras is not enough. It is necessary to practice
what is contained in the sutras. It is especially important to observe the precepts.
Without that, the Dharma cannot last long. Without the precepts, the true
Dharma would quickly fade.”
    “Is there a way of putting the precepts into a form that can be preserved for
thousands of lives to come?”
    “That is not yet possible, Sariputta. A finished set of precepts cannot be
created in one day or by one person. In the first years of the sangha, we didn’t
have any precepts. Gradually, because of shortcomings and errors committed by
brothers, we have created precepts. Now we have one hundred twenty precepts.
That number will increase over time. The precepts are not yet complete,
Sariputta. I believe the number may rise to two hundred or more.”
    The final day of the retreat arrived. The merchant Agnidatta returned from his
travels and was shocked to learn how much the bhikkhus had suffered from
hunger. He felt ashamed and organized a meal offering at his home. He also
offered each bhikkhu a new robe. After the Buddha delivered his final talk of the
season, the bhikkhus headed south.
    It was a lovely journey. The bhikkhus walked without haste. They rested
nights and begged in the mornings. After their meal and a rest in the cool forests,
they continued to walk each day. Sometimes they remained several days in a
village where the people were especially delighted to receive the teaching. At
night, the monks studied and recited the sutras before meditation and sleep.
    One afternoon, Svasti came across a group of young buffalo boys leading their
buffaloes home. He stopped and talked to them, reminiscing about his own
youth. Suddenly he was seized with a longing to see his family. He missed


Rupak and Bala, and most of all, Bhima. He still wondered if it was proper for a
bhikkhu to think about the family he had left. Of course, Rahula told him that he
had missed his family too.
   Svasti was twenty-two years old. He preferred the company of younger
people, feeling more at ease with them. He enjoyed time spent with Rahula the
most. They often shared their innermost thoughts. Svasti told Rahula about his
life as a buffalo boy. Rahula had never had an occasion to sit on a water buffalo’s
back. He had a hard time believing that so large a creature could be as docile as
Svasti claimed. Svasti assured him that water buffaloes were the gentlest of
animals. He told Rahula of the countless times he had lain on a buffalo’s back as
they walked home along the banks of the river. He would look up at the blue sky
and drifting clouds, enjoying moments of peaceful leisure on the warm, smooth
back of the buffalo. Svasti also told Rahula about the games he played with other
buffalo boys. Rahula loved to hear these stories. It was a life he had never
known, since he had been raised in a palace. Rahula said he wished he could
experience riding on a buffalo’s back, and Svasti promised him that he would
somehow arrange it.
   Svasti wondered how he could arrange a buffalo ride for Rahula. They were
both ordained monks! He decided that when they traveled in the vicinity of his
home village, he would ask the Buddha’s permission to go and see his family. He
would ask if Rahula could join him. Then, when no one else was around, he
would ask Rupak to let Rahula climb on the back of one of the buffaloes Rupak
tended. Rahula could ride along the banks of the Neranjara River. Svasti planned
to take off his monk’s robe and ride on a buffalo too, just like in the old days.
   The next year, the Buddha spent the retreat season on the stony mountain
Calika. It was the thirteenth retreat season since the Buddha’s Enlightenment.
Meghiya was serving as the Buddha’s assistant. One day Meghiya confided to
the Buddha that when he sat alone in the forest, he was disturbed by thoughts of
desire and passion. He was concerned because the Buddha encouraged the
bhikkhus to spend time alone in order to meditate, but whenever he meditated in
solitude, he was confronted by mental obstacles.
   The Buddha told him that practicing in solitude did not mean to live without
the support of friends. Wasting time in idle chatter and useless gossip with others
was not beneficial to the spiritual life, but receiving the support of friends in
one’s practice was most important. Bhikkhus needed to live in communities to
support and encourage each other. That was the meaning of taking refuge in the
sangha.


   The Buddha also told him, “A bhikkhu requires five things. The first is
understanding and virtuous friends who share the path. The second is precepts to
help the bhikkhu maintain mindfulness. The third is ample opportunity to study
the teaching. The fourth is diligence. And the fifth is understanding. The last
four conditions are closely linked to and depend upon the presence of the first
condition—having friends to practice with.
   “Meghiya, practice the contemplations on death, compassion, impermanence,
and the full awareness of breathing:
   “To overcome desire, practice the contemplation on a corpse, looking deeply
at the nine stages of the body’s decay from the time the breathing ceases to the
time the bones turn to dust.
   “To overcome anger and hatred, practice the contemplation on compassion. It
illuminates the causes of anger and hatred within our own minds and in the
minds of those who have precipitated it.
   “To overcome craving, practice the contemplation on impermanence,
illuminating the birth and death of all things.
   “To overcome confusion and dispersion, practice the contemplation on the full
awareness of breathing.
   “If you regularly practice these four contemplations, you will attain liberation
and enlightenment.”


                             Chapter Fifty-One
                            The Treasure of Insight
When the thirteenth retreat season ended, the Buddha returned to Savatthi.
Svasti and Rahula followed him. It was the first time Svasti had been to Jetavana
Monastery. He was delighted to discover how beautiful and inviting a place it
was to practice. Jetavana was cool, refreshing, and friendly. Everyone smiled
warmly at Svasti. They knew that the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes had been
inspired by him. Svasti was confident that in so supportive an environment he
would make great progress in his practice. He was beginning to understand why
the Sangha was as important as the Buddha and the Dharma. Sangha was the
community of persons practicing the Way of Awareness. It provided support and
guidance. It was necessary to take refuge in the sangha.
   Rahula turned twenty years old, and Sariputta performed his ordination
ceremony. He was now a fully ordained bhikkhu and all the community rejoiced.
Venerable Sariputta devoted several days prior to the ordination to give Rahula
special teaching. Svasti accompanied him during these sessions and so benefited
from Sariputta’s teaching as well.
   After Rahula’s ordination, the Buddha also spent time to teach him different
methods of contemplation. Svasti was invited to these sessions, too. The Buddha
taught them the contemplation on the six sense organs: eyes, ears, nose, tongue,
body, and mind; on the six sense objects: forms, sounds, smells, tastes, tactile
objects, and objects of mind; and the six sense consciousnesses: eye-
consciousness, ear-consciousness, nose-consciousness, taste-consciousness,
body-consciousness, and mind-consciousness. The Buddha showed them how to
look deeply into the impermanent nature of these eighteen domains of sense,
called the eighteen dhatus, which comprised the six sense organs, the six sense
objects, and the six sense consciousnesses or internal objects of sense.
Perceptions arose because of contact between a sense organ and a sense object.
All the domains of sense depended on each other for existence; they were all
impermanent and interdependent. If one could understand that, one could
penetrate the truth of the emptiness of self and transcend birth and death.
   The Buddha gave Rahula the teaching on the emptiness of self in great detail.


He said, “Rahula, among the five skandhas —body, feelings, perceptions, mental
formations, and consciousness—there is nothing that can be considered to be
permanent and nothing that can be called a ‘self.’ This body is not the self. This
body is not something that belongs to the self either. The self cannot be found in
the body, and the body cannot be found in the self.
   “There are three kinds of views of self. The first is that this body is the self, or
these feelings, perceptions, mental formations, or consciousness are the self.
This is ‘the belief in skandha as self,’ and it is the first wrong view. But when
one says, ‘The skandhas are not the self,’ one may fall into the second wrong
view and believe that the self is something that exists independently from the
skandhas and that the skandhas are its possessions. This second wrong view is
called ‘skandha is different from the self.’ The third wrong view consists in the
belief that there is a presence of the self in the skandhas, and there is the
presence of the skandhas in the self. This is called ‘the belief in the presence of
skandhas and self in each other.’
   “Rahula, practicing deeply the meditation on the emptiness of the self means
looking into the five skandhas in order to see that they are neither self, belonging
to self, nor interbeing with self. Once we overcome these three wrong views, we
can experience the true nature of ‘emptiness of all dharmas.”’
   Svasti noticed how a bhikkhu at Jetavana named Thera never spoke to anyone
else. He always walked alone. Venerable Thera did not disturb anyone nor did he
violate any precepts, and yet it seemed to Svasti that he did not live in genuine
harmony with the rest of the community. Once Svasti tried to speak with him,
but he walked away without responding. The other bhikkhus nicknamed him
“the one who lives alone.” Svasti had often heard the Buddha encourage the
bhikkhus to avoid idle talk, meditate more, and develop self-sufficiency. But
Svasti felt that Venerable Thera was not living the kind of self-sufficiency the
Buddha intended. Confused, Svasti decided to ask the Buddha about it.
   The next day, during his Dharma talk, the Buddha summoned the elder Thera.
He asked him, “Is it true that you prefer to keep to yourself and that you do all
things alone, avoiding contact with other bhikkhus?”
   The bhikkhu answered, “Yes, Lord, that is true. You have told us to be self-
sufficient and to practice being alone.”
   The Buddha turned to the community and said, “Bhikkhus, I will explain what
true self-sufficiency is and what is the better way to live alone. A self-sufficient
person is a person who dwells in mindfulness. He is aware of what is going on in
the present moment, what is going on in his body, feelings, mind, and objects of


mind. He knows how to look deeply at things in the present moment. He does
not pursue the past nor lose himself in the future, because the past no longer is
and the future has not yet come. Life can only take place in the present moment.
If we lose the present moment, we lose life. This is the better way to live alone.
   “Bhikkhus, what is meant by ‘pursuing the past’? To pursue the past means to
lose yourself in thoughts about what you looked like in the past, what your
feelings were then, what rank and position you held, what happiness or suffering
you experienced then. Giving rise to such thoughts entangles you in the past.
   “Bhikkhus, what is meant by ‘losing yourself in the future’? To lose yourself
in the future means to lose yourself in thoughts about the future. You imagine,
hope, fear, or worry about the future, wondering what you will look like, what
your feelings will be, whether you will have happiness or suffering. Giving rise
to such thoughts entangles you in the future.
   “Bhikkhus, return to the present moment in order to be in direct contact with
life and to see life deeply. If you cannot make direct contact with life, you cannot
see deeply. Mindfulness enables you to return to the present moment. But if you
are enslaved by desires and anxieties over what is happening in the present, you
will lose your mindfulness and you will not be truly present to life.
   “Bhikkhus, one who really knows how to be alone dwells in the present
moment, even if he is sitting in the midst of a crowd. If a person sitting alone in
the middle of a forest is not mindful, if he is haunted by the past and future, he is
not truly alone.”
   The Buddha then recited a gatha to summarize his teaching:
      “Do not pursue the past.
      Do not lose yourself in the future.
      The past no longer is.
      The future has not yet come.
      Looking deeply at life as it is
      in the very here and now,
      the practitioner dwells
      in stability and freedom.
      We must be diligent today.
      To wait until tomorrow is too late.
      Death comes unexpectedly.
      How can we bargain with it?
      The sage calls a person who knows


      how to dwell in mindfulness
      night and day
      ‘one who knows
      the better way to live alone.’”
   After reading the gatha, the Buddha thanked Thera and invited him to be
seated again. The Buddha had neither praised nor criticized Thera, but it was
clear that the bhikkhu now had a better grasp of what the Buddha meant by
being self-sufficient or being alone.
   During the Dharma discussion that took place later that evening, Svasti
listened to the senior disciples say how important the Buddha’s words had been
that morning. Venerable Ananda repeated the Buddha’s discourse, including the
gatha, word for word. Svasti was always amazed at Ananda’s memory. Ananda
even spoke with the same stress on words as the Buddha. When Ananda was
finished, Mahakaccana stood up and said, “I would like to suggest that we make
a formal sutra of the Buddha’s teaching this morning. I further suggest that we
name it the Bhaddekaratta Sutta, the Sutra on Knowing the Better Way to Live
Alone. Every bhikkhu should memorize this sutra and put it into practice.”
   Mahakassapa stood up and voiced his support for Mahakaccana’s idea.
   The next morning when the bhikkhus were out begging, they encountered a
group of children playing by the rice paddies. The children had caught a crab
which one boy held down with his forefinger. With his other hand, he ripped one
of the crab’s claws off. The other children clapped their hands and squealed.
Pleased with their reaction, the boy ripped the other claw off. Then he tore all of
the crab’s legs off, one by one. He tossed the crab back into the paddy and
caught another one.
   When the children saw the Buddha and bhikkhus arrive, they bowed their
heads and then returned to tormenting the next crab. The Buddha told the
children to stop. He said, “Children, if someone ripped off your arm or leg,
would it hurt?”
   “Yes, Teacher,” the children answered.
   “Did you know that crabs feel pain just as you do?”
   The children did not answer.
   The Buddha continued, “The crab eats and drinks just like you. It has parents,
brothers, and sisters. When you make it suffer, you make its family suffer as
well. Think about what you are doing.”
   The children appeared sorry for what they had done. Seeing that other


villagers had gathered around to see what he and the children were talking about,
the Buddha used the occasion to offer a teaching about compassion.
   He said, “Every living being deserves to enjoy a sense of security and well-
being. We should protect life and bring happiness to others. All living beings,
whether large or small, whether two-legged or four-legged, whether swimmers
or fliers, have a right to live. We should not harm or kill other living beings. We
should protect life.
   “Children, just as a mother loves and protects her only child at the risk of her
own life, we should open our hearts to protect all living beings. Our love should
encompass every living being on, below, within, outside, and around us. Day and
night, whether standing or walking, sitting or lying down, we should dwell in
that love.”
   The Buddha asked the children to release the crab they had caught. Then he
told everyone, “Meditating on love in this way brings happiness first to the one
who practices it. You sleep better and wake up more at ease; you do not have
nightmares; you are neither sorrowful nor anxious; and you are protected by
everyone and everything around you. Those people and beings you bring into
your mind of love and compassion bring you great joy, and, slowly, their
suffering leaves them.”
   Svasti knew that the Buddha was committed to sharing the teaching with
children. To help with that, he and Rahula organized special classes for children
at Jetavana. With the assistance of young laypersons, especially Sudatta’s four
children, the young people gathered for special teaching once a month. Sudatta’s
son, Kala, was not very enthusiastic at first about attending. He only did so
because he was fond of Svasti. But little by little his interest grew. Princess
Vajiri, the king’s daughter, also lent her support to these classes.
   One full moon day, she asked the children to bring flowers to offer to the
Buddha. The children arrived with flowers picked from their own gardens and
from fields along the way to the monastery. Princess Vajiri brought an armful of
lotus flowers she had gathered from the palace’s lotus pool. When she and the
children went to find the Buddha at his hut, they learned he was in the Dharma
hall preparing to give a discourse to both bhikkhus and laypersons. The princess
led the children quietly into the hall. All the adults moved to make a pathway for
the children. They placed their flowers on the small table in front of the Buddha
and then bowed. The Buddha smiled and bowed in return. He invited the
children to sit right in front of him.
   The Buddha’s Dharma talk that day was most special. He waited for the


children to be seated quietly, and then he slowly stood up. He picked up one of
the lotus flowers and held it up before the community. He did not say anything.
Everyone sat perfectly still. The Buddha continued to hold up the flower without
saying anything for a long time. People were perplexed and wondered what he
meant by doing that. Then the Buddha looked out over the community and
smiled.
   He said, “I have the eyes of true Dharma, the treasure of wondrous insight,
and I have just transmitted it to Mahakassapa.”
   Everyone turned to look at Venerable Kassapa and saw that he was smiling.
His eyes had not wavered from the Buddha and the lotus he held. When the
people looked back at the Buddha, they saw that he too was looking at the lotus
and smiling.
   Though Svasti felt perplexed, he knew that the most important thing was to
maintain mindfulness. He began to observe his breath as he looked at the
Buddha. The white lotus in the Buddha’s hand had newly blossomed. The
Buddha held it in a most gentle, noble gesture. His thumb and forefinger held the
stem of the flower which trailed the shape of his hand. His hand was as beautiful
as the lotus itself, pure and wondrous. Suddenly, Svasti truly saw the pure and
noble beauty of the flower. There was nothing to think about. Quite naturally, a
smile arose on his face.
The Buddha’s Dharma talk that day was most special.


  The Buddha began to speak. “Friends, this flower is a wondrous reality. As I
hold the flower before you, you all have a chance to experience it. Making
contact with a flower is to make contact with a wondrous reality. It is making
contact with life itself.
  “Mahakassapa smiled before anyone else because he was able to make contact
with the flower. As long as obstacles remain in your minds, you will not be able
to make contact with the flower. Some of you asked yourselves, ‘Why is
Gautama holding that flower up? What is the meaning of his gesture?’ If your
minds are occupied with such thoughts, you cannot truly experience the flower.
  “Friends, being lost in thoughts is one of the things that prevents us from


making true contact with life. If you are ruled by worry, frustration, anxiety,
anger, or jealousy, you will lose the chance to make real contact with all the
wonders of life.
   “Friends, the lotus in my hand is only real to those of you who dwell
mindfully in the present moment. If you do not return to the present moment, the
flower does not truly exist. There are people who can pass through a forest of
sandalwood trees without ever really seeing one tree. Life is filled with
suffering, but it also contains many wonders. Be aware in order to see both the
suffering and the wonders in life.
   “Being in touch with suffering does not mean to become lost in it. Being in
touch with the wonders of life does not mean to lose ourselves in them either.
Being in touch is to truly encounter life, to see it deeply. If we directly encounter
life, we will understand its interdependent and impermanent nature. Thanks to
that, we will no longer lose ourselves in desire, anger, and craving. We will
dwell in freedom and liberation.”
   Svasti felt happy. He was glad he had smiled and understood before the
Buddha spoke. Venerable Mahakassapa had smiled first. He was one of Svasti’s
teachers and a senior disciple who had traveled far on the path. Svasti knew he
could not compare himself to Mahakassapa and the other elders like Sariputta,
Moggallana, and Assaji. After all, he was still only twenty-four years old!


                              Chapter Fifty-Two
                                  Fields of Merit
The following year Svasti spent the retreat season at Nigrodha monastery in
Kapilavatthu. The Buddha had returned to his homeland prior to the retreat after
hearing about the conflict and unrest between the kingdoms of Sakya and
Koliya. Koliya was his mother’s native land. Princess Yasodhara was also from
Koliya.
   The two kingdoms were separated by the Rohini River. In fact, the dispute
concerned the rights to the river’s water. Because of a drought, neither kingdom
had enough water to irrigate its fields. Both kingdoms wanted to build a dam in
the Rohini in order to have what little water there was. At first the conflict began
as no more than angry words hurled back and forth across the river by farmers,
but soon passions escalated and farmers began to throw rocks at each other.
Police were sent in to protect citizens, and finally, soldiers were lined up on
either side of the river. It looked as if the conflict could erupt into a war at any
moment.
   The Buddha wanted, first of all, to understand the causes of the dispute. He
asked the Sakya generals by the river, and they accused the citizens of Koliya of
threatening the lives and property of Sakya citizens. Then he asked the generals
on the Koliya side, and they accused the Sakya citizens of threatening the lives
and property of the citizens of Koliya. Only when the Buddha spoke directly to
the local farmers did he learn that the real source of the conflict was the lack of
water.
   Thanks to his close ties with both the Sakya and Koliya dynasties, the Buddha
was able to bring about a meeting between King Mahanama and King
Suppabuddha. He asked them to negotiate a quick solution to the crisis, because
both sides would lose in a war, whether the loss was greater or smaller. He said,
“Your Majesties, which is more precious, water or human lives?”
   The kings agreed that human lives were infinitely more precious.
   The Buddha said, “Your Majesties, the need for adequate irrigation water has
caused this conflict. If pride and anger had not flared up, this conflict could have
been easily resolved. There is no need for war! Examine your hearts. Do not


waste the blood of your people because of pride and anger. Once pride and anger
are released, the tensions that lead to war will disappear. Sit down and negotiate
how the river water can be shared equally with both sides in this time of drought.
Both sides must be assured of an equal amount of water.”
   Thanks to the Buddha’s counsel, the two sides quickly reached an agreement.
Warm and cordial relations were re-established. King Mahanama asked the
Buddha to remain and spend the retreat season in Sakya. It was the fifteenth
retreat season since the Buddha attained Enlightenment.
   After the retreat, the Buddha returned south. He spent the sixteenth retreat
season in Alavi, the seventeenth at Bamboo Forest, the eighteenth in Koliya, and
the nineteenth in Rajagaha.
   Whenever he stayed in Rajagaha, the Buddha preferred dwelling on
Gijjhakuta Mountain. Because the peak resembled a vulture, it was called
Vulture Peak. King Bimbisara frequently visited the Buddha on Vulture Peak for
Dharma instruction. He even had steps built into the mountainside that led all the
way to the Buddha’s hut. He also had small bridges built over the tumbling
waterfalls and springs. He liked to leave his carriage at the foot of the mountain
and climb up the stone steps. Close by the Buddha’s hut was a rock as large as
several houses, and a clear stream where he could wash his robes and dry them
on a smooth rock. The Buddha’s hut was constructed of stones gathered on the
mountain. The view from the Buddha’s hut was magnificent. He especially
enjoyed watching the sunsets. Senior disciples such as Sariputta, Uruvela
Kassapa, Moggallana, Upali, Devadatta, and Ananda, also had huts on Vulture
Peak.
   The Buddha’s sangha now had eighteen practice centers in and near Rajagaha.
In addition to Bamboo Forest (Venuvana) and Vulture Peak, some of the centers
were      Vaibharavana,      Sarpasundika-pragbhara,      Saptaparnaguha,     and
Indrasailaguha. The last two were located in enormous caves.
   Jivaka, the son of Ambapali and King Bimbisara, was now a physician, and he
lived in a hut close by Vulture Peak, having become one of the Buddha’s closest
lay disciples. He was already renowned for his skill in curing diseases that had
always been fatal in the past. He served as King Bimbisara’s personal physician.
   Jivaka looked after the health of the Buddha and bhikkhus on Vulture Peak
and at Bamboo Forest. Every winter, he organized friends to offer extra robes to
the bhikkhus to use as blankets for warmth at night. He offered a robe to the
Buddha himself. Jivaka was interested in the prevention of diseases as well as
their cure. He suggested a number of basic sanitary measures to the bhikkhus.


He suggested that water taken from ponds and lakes be boiled before drinking it,
that the bhikkhus wash their robes at least once every seven days, and that more
toilets be provided on the monastery grounds. He cautioned not to keep food
overnight for consumption on the following day. The Buddha accepted all of
Jivaka’s suggestions.
   Robe offering became a very popular practice among the laypeople. One day
the Buddha spotted a bhikkhu returning to the monastery with a pile of robes
heaped on his shoulder. The Buddha asked him, “How many robes do you have
there?”
The Buddha washed the robe that Jivaka had given him.


   The bhikkhu answered, “Lord, I have eight.”
   “Do you think you need that many?”
   “No, Lord, I do not. I only accepted them because the people offered them to
me.”
   “How many robes do you think a bhikkhu actually needs?”
   “Lord, according to my way of thinking, three robes are adequate. Three are
plenty to keep warm on cold nights.”
   “I share your thoughts. I find three robes sufficient on cold nights. From now
on let us announce that each bhikkhu will own only one begging bowl and no
more than three robes. If more than that are offered, the bhikkhu will decline


them.”
   The bhikkhu bowed to the Buddha and then walked back to his own hut.
   One day while standing on a high hill, the Buddha looked out over the fields
of rice paddies. He turned to Ananda and said, “Ananda, how beautiful are the
golden patches of rice that stretch to the horizon! Wouldn’t it be nice to sew our
robes in the same checkered pattern?”
   Ananda said, “Lord, it is a wonderful idea. Sewing bhikkhus’ robes in the
same pattern as rice fields would be lovely. You have said that a bhikkhu who
practices the Way is like a fertile field in which seeds of virtue and merit have
been sown to benefit both the present and future generations. When one makes
offerings to such a bhikkhu or studies and practices with him, it is like sowing
seeds of virtue and merit. I will tell the rest of the community to sew future robes
in the pattern of rice fields. We can call our robes ‘fields of merit.’”
   The Buddha smiled his approval.
   The following year the Buddha returned to Jetavana for the retreat season,
after Sudatta came to Rajagaha and reminded the Buddha how long it had been
since he had spent a retreat at Jetavana. It was the twentieth retreat season since
the Buddha attained Enlightenment. The Buddha was now fifty-five years old.
King Pasenadi rejoiced when he heard of the Buddha’s return, and he visited the
Buddha with all the royal family, including his second wife, Vrsabhaksatriya,
and their two children, Prince Vidudabha and Princess Vajna. His second wife
was of the Sakya clan. After King Pasenadi had become the Buddha’s disciple
years ago, he sent a delegation to Sakya to request the hand of a Sakya princess.
King Mahanama sent his own daughter, the beautiful Vrsabhaksatriya.
   King Pasenadi did not miss a single Dharma talk given by the Buddha during
the retreat season. More and more people came to hear the Buddha teach. One of
the most supportive new lay disciples was Lady Visakha who offered the
bhikkhus her large and verdant forest east of Savatthi. Though it was somewhat
smaller in size, it was no less beautiful than Jetavana. With the help of many of
her friends, Lady Visakha had a meditation hall, Dharma hall, and huts built in
the forest. At Venerable Sariputta’s suggestion they named this new monastery
Eastern Park, or Purvarama. The Dharma hall located in the center of the forest
was named Visakha Hall.
   Lady Visakha was born in the city of Bhaddiya in the kingdom of Anga. She
was the daughter of an extremely wealthy man named Dhananjaya. Her husband,
a wealthy man from Savatthi, and her son had been disciples of Nigantha
Nataputta and neither had felt drawn to the Buddha initially. However, inspired


by Lady Visakha’s devotion to the Dharma, they slowly began to be interested
and finally asked to became lay disciples. Lady Visakha and her friend Lady
Suppiya visited the Buddha’s monasteries frequently, offering medicine, robes,
and towels to any bhikkhus and bhikkhunis who needed them. She also pledged
to support Sister Mahapajapati’s efforts in building a spiritual center for the
bhikkhunis along the right bank of the Ganga. Lady Visakha was an ardent
supporter of the nuns, both in material and spiritual matters. Her compassionate
wisdom was helpful on more than one occasion in helping to resolve minor
conflicts among the bhikkhunis.
   Two important decisions were made during a Dharma meeting that took place
in Visakha’s Hall. The first was that Ananda should be the Buddha’s permanent
assistant. The second one was that the Buddha should return every year to
Savatthi for the rainy retreat season.
   The first suggestion was proposed by Sariputta who said, “Brother Ananda
has the finest memory among us. No one else possesses his uncanny ability to
remember every word the Buddha speaks. He can repeat the Buddha’s discourses
without leaving out one word. If Ananda serves as the Buddha’s attendant, he
will be present to hear all that the Buddha teaches, whether it is a Dharma talk
delivered to a large crowd or a private conversation with a lay disciple. The
Buddha’s teaching is infinitely precious. We should make every effort to
preserve and protect it. Through our negligence in the past twenty years, we
have lost many things the Buddha has uttered. Brother Ananda, on behalf of all
of us and on behalf of future generations, please accept the task of being the
Buddha’s attendant.”
   All the bhikkhus voiced their support for Venerable Sariputta’s proposal.
Venerable Ananda, however, expressed reluctance. He said, “I see a number of
problems. To begin with, it is not certain that the Buddha will agree to have me
as his attendant. The Buddha has always been careful not to treat members of the
Sakya clan with special favors. He is even strict and reserved with Bhikkhuni
Mahapajapati, his own stepmother. Rahula has never slept in the Buddha’s hut or
shared a private meal with him. The Buddha has never afforded me any special
privileges. I am afraid that if I am chosen as his attendant, some brothers will
accuse me of using my position to attain special favors. Other brothers may
accuse me of pointing out their faults to the Buddha should the Buddha happen
to correct them.”
   Ananda looked at Sariputta, and then continued, “The Buddha has especially
high regard for our brother Sariputta, the most talented and intelligent brother


among us. Sariputta has been instrumental in teaching and organizing the
sangha, and it is only natural that the Buddha places a great deal of trust in him.
Even so, Sariputta has earned the jealousy of many brothers. Although the
Buddha always confers with several people before making a major decision,
some brothers complain that Sariputta makes the decisions, as if the Buddha
were incapable of making his own decisions. These accusations are ridiculous,
but it is because of this sort of misunderstanding that I wish to decline becoming
the Buddha’s attendant.”
   Venerable Sariputta smiled. “I am not afraid of another brother’s jealousy that
may arise from his temporary misunderstanding. I believe that each of us should
do what we see to be correct and beneficial, regardless of what others may say.
Ananda, we know that you are careful and attentive in all your actions. Please
accept this position. If you don’t, the Dharma will suffer in this generation and
for generations to come.”
   Venerable Ananda sat silently. After a long hesitation, he finally said, “I will
accept this position if the Buddha will agree to these requests: First, the Buddha
will never give me any of his own robes. Second, the Buddha will not share his
food offerings with me. Third, the Buddha will not allow me to dwell in the
same hut with him. Fourth, the Buddha will not ask me to accompany him to a
lay disciple’s home for a meal. Fifth, if I am invited to a lay disciple’s home for a
meal, the Buddha can go as well. Sixth, the Buddha will allow me to use my
discretion in admitting or refusing people who come to request an audience with
him. Seventh, the Buddha will let me ask him to repeat things he says that I have
not fully grasped. And eighth, the Buddha will repeat the essence of any Dharma
talks he gives that I have been unable to attend.”
   Venerable Upali stood to speak, “Ananda’s conditions seem most reasonable. I
am sure the Buddha will agree to them. However, I cannot agree with the fourth
request. If our brother Ananda does not accompany the Buddha to the homes of
lay disciples, how will he be able to record things the Buddha says to laymen
and women which may be of benefit to future generations and all of us? I
suggest that whenever the Buddha is invited for a meal at a layperson’s home, he
take another bhikkhu in addition to Ananda. That way, no one can accuse
Ananda of receiving special favors.”
   Ananda said, “Brother, I do not think that is such a good suggestion. What if
the lay disciple only has the means to offer food to two bhikkhus?”
   Upali retorted, “Then the Buddha and you two bhikkhus will have to be
content eating less!”


   The rest of the bhikkhus burst into hearty laughter. They knew the problem of
finding the best attendant for the Buddha had been solved. They next considered
the proposal that the Buddha hold every rainy season retreat in Savatthi. Savatthi
was a good location because Jetavana, Eastern Park, and the bhikkhunis’ convent
were all nearby. It would serve well as the sangha’s main center. With the
Buddha in the same location every year, many people could plan to attend the
retreat and receive the Buddha’s teaching directly. Lay patrons such as
Anathapindika and Lady Visakha had already pledged to provide food, medicine,
robes, and lodging for any bhikkhus and bhikkhunis traveling to Savatthi for the
retreat season.
   The bhikkhus concluded their meeting by agreeing to hold every rainy retreat
in Savatthi, and they went directly to the Buddha’s hut to present their ideas. The
Buddha happily accepted both proposals.


                           Chapter Fifty-Three
                       Dwelling in the Present Moment
In the spring of the following year, the Buddha delivered the Satipatthana Sutta,
the Sutra on the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, to a gathering of more than
three hundred bhikkhus in Kammassadhamma, which was the capital of Kuru.
This was a sutra fundamental for the practice of meditation. The Buddha referred
to it as the path which could help every person attain peace of body and mind,
overcome all sorrows and lamentations, destroy suffering and grief, and attain
highest understanding and total emancipation. Later, Venerable Sariputta told the
community that this was one of the most important sutras the Buddha had ever
given. He encouraged every bhikkhu and bhikkhuni to study, memorize, and
practice it.
   Venerable Ananda repeated every word of the sutra later that night. Sati means
“to dwell in mindfulness,” that is, the practitioner remains aware of everything
taking place in his body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind—the four
establishments of mindfulness, or awareness.
   First the practitioner observes his body—his breath; the four bodily postures
of walking, standing, lying, and sitting; bodily actions such as going forward and
backward, looking, putting on robes, eating, drinking, using the toilet, speaking,
and washing robes; the parts of the body such as hair, teeth, sinews, bones,
internal organs, marrow, intestines, saliva, and sweat; the elements which
compose the body such as water, air, and heat; and the stages of a body’s decay
from the time it dies to when the bones turn to dust.
   While observing the body, the practitioner is aware of all details concerning
the body. For example, while breathing in, the practitioner knows he is breathing
in; breathing out, he knows he is breathing out; breathing in and making his
whole body calm and at peace, the practitioner knows he is breathing in and
making his whole body calm and at peace. Walking, the practitioner knows he is
walking. Sitting, the practitioner knows he is sitting. Performing movements
such as putting on robes or drinking water, the practitioner knows he is putting
on robes or drinking water. The contemplation of the body is not realized only
during the moments of sitting meditation, but throughout the entire day,


including the moments one is begging, eating, and washing one’s bowl.
   In the contemplation of feelings, the practitioner contemplates feelings as they
arise, develop, and fade, feelings which are pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral.
Feelings can have as their source either the body or the mind. When he feels pain
from a toothache, the practitioner is aware that he feels pain from a toothache;
when he is happy because he has received praise, the practitioner is aware that
he is happy because he has received praise. The practitioner looks deeply in
order to calm and quiet every feeling in order to clearly see the sources which
give rise to feelings. The contemplation of feelings does not take place only
during the moments of sitting meditation. It is practiced throughout the day.
   In the contemplation of mind, the practitioner contemplates the presence of his
mental states. Craving, he knows he is craving; not craving, he knows he is not
craving. Angry or drowsy, he knows he is angry or drowsy; not angry or drowsy,
he knows he is not angry or drowsy. Centered or distracted, he knows he is
centered or distracted. Whether he is open-minded, close-minded, blocked,
concentrated, or enlightened, the practitioner knows at once. And if he is not
experiencing any of those states, the practitioner also knows at once. The
practitioner recognizes and is aware of every mental state which arises within
him in the present moment.
   In the contemplation of the objects of mind, the practitioner contemplates the
five hindrances to liberation (sense-desire, ill-will, drowsiness, agitation, and
doubt) whenever they are present; the five skandhas which comprise a person
(body, feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness); the six
sense organs and the six sense objects; the Seven Factors of Awakening (full
attention, investigating dharmas, energy, joy, ease, concentration, and letting-go);
and the Four Noble Truths (the existence of suffering, the causes of suffering,
liberation from suffering, and the path that leads to liberation from suffering).
These are all objects of the mind, and they contain all dharmas.
   The Buddha carefully explained each of the four establishments. He said that
whoever practiced these four establishments for seven years would attain
emancipation. He added that anyone who practiced them for seven months could
also attain emancipation. He said that even after practicing these four
contemplations for seven days, one could attain emancipation.
   During a Dharma discussion, Venerable Assaji reminded the community that
this was not the first time the Buddha had taught the Four Establishments of
Mindfulness. He had, in fact, spoken about them on several occasions, but this
was the first time he had compiled all of his previous teaching on the subject in


so complete and thorough a way. Assaji agreed with Sariputta that this sutra
should be memorized, recited, and practiced by every bhikkhu and bhikkhuni.
   When the Buddha returned to Jetavana towards the end of spring that year, he
met and transformed a notorious murderer named Angulimala. One morning
when the Buddha entered Savatthi, it seemed like a ghost town. All doors were
bolted shut. No one was on the streets. The Buddha stood in front of a home
where he normally received food offerings. The door opened a crack and seeing
it was the Buddha, the owner hastily ran out and invited him to enter. Once
inside, the owner latched the door and invited the Buddha to sit. He suggested
the Buddha remain to eat his meal inside the house. He said, “Lord, it is very
dangerous to go outdoors today. The murderer Angulimala has been seen in
these parts. They say he has killed many people in other cities. Every time he
kills someone, he cuts off one of their fingers and adds it to a string he wears
around his neck. They say that once he has killed a hundred people and has a
talisman of a hundred fingers hanging around his neck, he will gain even more
terrible, evil powers. It is strange—he never steals anything from the people he
murders. King Pasenadi has organized a brigade of soldiers and police to hunt
him down.”
   The Buddha asked, “Why must the king enlist the aid of an entire brigade of
soldiers to hunt down just one man?”
   “Respected Gautama, Angulimala is very dangerous. He possesses
phenomenal fighting skills. Once he overcame forty men who surrounded him
on a street. He killed most of them. The survivors had to flee for their lives.
Angulimala is said to hide out in Jalini Forest. No one dares pass by there
anymore. Not long ago, twenty armed police entered the forest to try to capture
him. Only two came out alive. Now that Angulimala has been spotted in the city,
no one dares go out to work or shop.”
   The Buddha thanked the man for telling him about Angulimala and then stood
up to take his leave. The man implored the Buddha to remain safely inside, but
the Buddha refused. He said that he could only preserve the trust of the people
by continuing to do his begging as usual.
   As the Buddha walked slowly and mindfully down the street, he suddenly
heard the sound of steps running behind him in the distance. He knew it was
Angulimala, but he felt no fear. He continued to take slow steps, aware of
everything taking place within and outside of himself.
   Angulimala shouted, “Stop, monk! Stop!”
   The Buddha continued taking slow, stable steps. He knew from the sound of


Angulimala’s footsteps that he had slowed down to a brisk walk and was not far
behind. Although the Buddha was now fifty-six-years old, his sight and hearing
were keener than ever. He held nothing but his begging bowl. He smiled as he
recollected how quick and agile he had been in martial arts as a young prince.
The other young men were never able to deliver him a blow. The Buddha knew
that Angulimala was very close now and was surely carrying a weapon. The
Buddha continued to walk with ease.
   When Angulimala caught up to the Buddha, he walked alongside him and
said, “I told you to stop, monk. Why don’t you stop?”
   The Buddha continued to walk as he said, “Angulimala, I stopped a long time
ago. It is you who have not stopped.”
   Angulimala was startled by the Buddha’s unusual reply. He blocked the
Buddha’s path, forcing the Buddha to stop. The Buddha looked into
Angulimala’s eyes. Again, Angulimala was startled. The Buddha’s eyes shone
like two stars. Angulimala had never encountered someone who radiated such
serenity and ease. Everyone else always ran away from him in terror. Why didn’t
this monk show any fear? The Buddha was looking at him as if he were a friend
or brother. The Buddha had said Angulimala’s name, so it was clear that he knew
who Angulimala was. Surely he knew about his treacherous deeds. How could
he remain so calm and relaxed when faced with a murderer? Suddenly
Angulimala felt he could no longer bear the Buddha’s kind and gentle gaze. He
said, “Monk, you said you stopped a long time ago. But you were still walking.
You said I was the one who has not stopped. What did you mean by that?”
   The Buddha replied, “Angulimala, I stopped committing acts that cause
suffering to other living beings a long time ago. I have learned to protect life, the
lives of all beings, not just humans. Angulimala, all living beings want to live.
All fear death. We must nurture a heart of compassion and protect the lives of all
beings. ”
   “Human beings do not love each other. Why should I love other people?
Humans are cruel and deceptive. I will not rest until I have killed them all.”
   The Buddha spoke gently, “Angulimala, I know you have suffered deeply at
the hands of other humans. Sometimes humans can be most cruel. Such cruelty
is the result of ignorance, hatred, desire, and jealousy. But humans can also be
understanding and compassionate. Have you ever met a bhikkhu before?
Bhikkhus vow to protect the lives of all other beings. They vow to overcome
desire, hatred, and ignorance. There are many people, not just bhikkhus, whose
lives are based on understanding and love. Angulimala, there may be cruel


people in this world, but there are also many kind people. Do not be blinded. My
path can transform cruelty into kindness. Hatred is the path you are on now. You
should stop. Choose the path of forgiveness, understanding, and love instead.”
   Angulimala was moved by the monk’s words. Yet his mind was thrown into
confusion, as well, and suddenly he felt as if he had been cut open and salt
thrown on the open wound. He could see that the Buddha spoke from love.
There was no hatred in the Buddha, no aversion. The monk looked at
Angulimala as if he considered him a whole person worthy of respect. Could this
monk be the very Gautama he had heard people praise, the one they called “the
Buddha”? Angulimala asked, “Are you the monk Gautama?”
   The Buddha nodded.
   Angulimala said, “It is a great pity I did not meet you sooner. I have gone too
far already on my path of destruction. It is no longer possible to turn back.”
   The Buddha said, “No, Angulimala, it is never too late to do a good act.”
   “What good act could I possibly do?”
   “Stop traveling the road of hatred and violence. That would be the greatest act
of all. Angulimala, though the sea of suffering is immense, look back and you
will see the shore.”
   “Gautama, even if I wanted to, I could not turn back now. No one would let
me live in peace after all I have done.”
   The Buddha grasped Angulimala’s hand and said, “Angulimala, I will protect
you if you vow to abandon your mind of hatred and devote yourself to the study
and practice of the Way. Take the vow to begin anew and serve others. It is easy
to see you are a man of intelligence. I have no doubt you could succeed on the
path of realization.”
   Angulimala knelt before the Buddha. He removed the sword strapped to his
back, placed it on the earth, and prostrated himself at the Buddha’s feet. He
covered his face in his hands and began to sob. After a long time, he looked up
and said, “I vow to abandon my evil ways. I will follow you and learn
compassion from you. I beg you to accept me as your disciple.”
   At that moment, Venerables Sariputta, Ananda, Upali, Kimbila, and several
other bhikkhus arrived on the scene. They surrounded the Buddha and
Angulimala. Seeing the Buddha safe and Angulimala preparing to take the
refuges, their hearts rejoiced. The Buddha asked Ananda to give him an extra set
of robes. He told Sariputta to ask the next house if they could borrow a razor for
Upali to shave Angulimala’s head. Angulimala was ordained right then and
there. He knelt down, recited the three refuges, and was given the precepts by


Upali. Afterwards, they returned to Jetavana together.
   Over the next ten days, Upali and Sariputta taught Angulimala about the
practice of the precepts, the practice of meditation, and the way of begging.
Angulimala made a greater effort than any other bhikkhu before him. Even the
Buddha was astonished at his transformation when he visited Angulimala two
weeks after his ordination. Angulimala radiated serenity and stability, and so rare
a gentleness that the other bhikkhus called him “Ahimsaka” which means
“Nonviolent One.” It had, in fact, been his name at birth. Svasti found it a most
fitting name for him, for outside of the Buddha, there was no other bhikkhu
whose gaze was more filled with kindness.
Angulimala prostrated himself at the Buddha’s feet.


   One morning, the Buddha entered Savatthi to beg, accompanied by fifty other
bhikkhus, including bhikkhu Ahimsaka. As they reached the city gates, they met
King Pasenadi mounted on a steed leading a battalion of soldiers. The king and
his generals were dressed in full fighting gear. When the king saw the Buddha,
he dismounted and bowed.
   The Buddha asked, “Majesty, has something happened? Has another kingdom
invaded your borders?”
   The king replied, “Lord, no one has invaded Kosala. I have gathered these
soldiers to capture the murderer Angulimala. He is extremely dangerous. No one
has yet been able to bring him to justice. He was seen in the city just two weeks


ago. My people are still living in constant fear.”
   The Buddha asked, “Are you sure Angulimala is really that dangerous?”
   The king said, “Lord, Angulimala is a danger to every man, woman, and child.
I cannot rest until he is found and killed.”
   The Buddha asked, “If Angulimala repented his ways and vowed never to kill
again, if he took the vows of a bhikkhu and respected all living beings, would
you still need to capture and kill him?”
   “Lord, if Angulimala became your disciple and followed the precept against
killing, if he lived the pure and harmless life of a bhikkhu, my happiness would
know no bounds! Not only would I spare his life and grant him freedom, I would
offer him robes, food, and medicine. But I hardly think such a thing will come to
pass!”
   The Buddha pointed to Ahimsaka standing behind him and said, “Your
majesty, this monk is none other than Angulimala. He has taken the precepts of a
bhikkhu. He has become a new man in these past two weeks.”
   King Pasenadi was horrified when he realized he was standing so close to the
notorious killer.
   The Buddha said, “There is no need to fear him, your majesty. Bhikkhu
Angulimala is gentler than a handful of earth. We call him Ahimsaka now.”
   The king stared long and hard at Ahimsaka and then bowed to him. He asked,
“Respected monk, what family were you born into? What was your father’s
name?”
   “Your majesty, my father’s name was Gagga. My mother was Mantani.”
   “Bhikkhu Gagga Mantaniputta, allow me to offer you robes, food, and
medicine.”
   Ahimsaka answered, “Thank you, your majesty, but I have three robes already.
I receive my food each day by begging, and I have no need for medicine at
present. Please accept my heartfelt gratitude for your offer.”
   The king bowed again to the new bhikkhu and then turned to the Buddha.
“Enlightened Master, your virtue is truly wondrous! You bring peace and well-
being to situations no one else can. What others fail to resolve by force and
violence, you resolve by your great virtue. Let me express my profound
gratitude.”
   The king departed after informing his generals they could disband the troops
and everyone could return to their regular duties.


                           Chapter Fifty-Four
                            Dwell in Mindfulness
News about Angulimala’s ordination spread quickly throughout the city.
Everyone sighed with relief. Even neighboring kingdoms soon learned of the
murderer’s transformation, and the people held the Buddha and his sangha in
ever greater esteem.
   The sangha continued to attract many bright and able young men who
abandoned other sects to follow the teaching of the Buddha. The story of how
lay disciple Upali left the Nigantha sect became a heated topic of conversation
among religious circles in Magadha and Kosala. Upali was a wealthy and
talented young man who lived in northern Magadha. He was one of the chief
patrons of the Nigantha sect, led by a teacher named Nataputta. The ascetics of
Nigantha lived most frugally, shunning even clothes, and they were highly
regarded by the people.
   That spring, the Buddha was dwelling in Pavarika Mango Grove in Nalanda.
He received a visit from one of Nataputta’s senior students, the ascetic Digha
Tappasi, who stopped by one day after begging in Nalanda. The Buddha learned
from Tappasi that the followers of Nigantha did not speak of karma (karmani),
but only of sins (dandani). Tappasi explained that there were three kinds of sin:
sins committed by the body, sins caused by wrong speech, and sinful thoughts.
When the Buddha asked him which form of sin was the most serious, the ascetic
answered, “Sins committed by the body are the most serious.”
   The Buddha told him that according to the Way of Awakening, unwholesome
thought was considered more serious because the mind was more fundamental.
Ascetic Tappasi had the Buddha repeat this three times so that he could recant it
later. He then took his leave and returned to Nataputta who burst out laughing
when Tappasi told him what the Buddha had said.
   Nataputta said, “That monk Gautama has made a grave error. Sinful thought
and speech are not the greatest sins. Sins committed by the body are the most
serious and have the longest lasting consequences. Ascetic Tappasi, you have
grasped the essentials of my teaching.”
   A number of other disciples were present during this exchange, including the


merchant Upali who was visiting with several of his friends from Balaka. Upali
expressed an interest in visiting the Buddha himself to challenge the Buddha’s
view on this matter. Nataputta encouraged Upali to go, but Tappasi expressed
reservations. He was worried that the Buddha might be able to convince Upali
and perhaps even convert him.
   Nataputta had great faith in Upali and said, “There is no need to fear that
Upali will leave us to become a disciple of Gautama’s. Who can say, perhaps
Gautama will become a disciple of Upali’s!”
   Tappasi still tried to discourage Upali from going, but Upali’s mind was set.
When Upali met the Buddha, he was immediately impressed by the Buddha’s
lively and stimulating way of speaking. By using seven examples, the Buddha
showed Upali why unwholesome thought was more fundamental than
unwholesome speech or action. The Buddha knew that disciples of the Nigantha
sect observed the precept not to kill. He knew how careful they were not to step
on insects for fear they would crush them, and he praised them for this. Then he
asked Upali, “If you do not intentionally step on an insect, but do so accidentally,
have you committed a sin?”
   Upali responded, “Master Nataputta says that if you did not intend to kill, you
have not committed a sin.”
   The Buddha smiled and said, “Then Master Nataputta agrees that thought is
what is fundamental. How then can he maintain that sinful action is more
serious?”
   Upali was impressed with the Buddha’s clarity and wisdom. He later
confessed to the Buddha that the first example was sufficiently convincing, and
he had only pressed the Buddha to provide more examples in order to have a
chance to listen to more of the Buddha’s teaching. When the Buddha finished
explaining the seventh example, Upali prostrated before him and asked to be
accepted as a disciple.
   The Buddha said, “Upali, you should consider such a request carefully. A man
of your intelligence and stature should not make a hasty decision. Reflect until
you are sure.”
   The Buddha’s words made Upali respect him all the more. He could see that
the Buddha was not interested in converting others in order to add to his own
prestige. No other spiritual teacher had ever told Upali to reflect carefully before
supporting his community. Upali answered, “Lord, I have reflected enough.
Please allow me to take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. I am
most grateful and happy to have discovered the true and correct path.”


   The Buddha said, “Disciple Upali, you have long been a major patron of the
Nigantha sect. Even though you take refuge with me, please do not cease making
offerings to your former sect.”
   Upali said, “Lord, you are truly noble. You are open and generous, unlike any
teacher I have ever known.”
   When Tappasi delivered the news to Nataputta that Upali had become one of
the Buddha’s disciples, Nataputta couldn’t believe it. He went with Tappasi to
Upali’s house where Upali confirmed the truth.
   More and more people throughout the kingdoms of Magadha and Kosala
accepted the Path of Awakening. Many bhikkhus announced this happy news to
the Buddha when they visited him in Savatthi.
   The Buddha told them, “Whether the increase in numbers of people accepting
the Path as their own is good news or not depends on how diligent the bhikkhus
are in their practice. We should not cling to concepts of success or failure. We
should look at both fortune and misfortune with equanimity.”
   One morning as the Buddha and the bhikkhus prepared to leave the monastery
to go begging, several police entered Jetavana with orders to search for the body
of a woman. The bhikkhus were dismayed, not understanding why the police
expected to find a woman’s corpse on the monastery grounds. Venerable
Bhaddiya asked who the woman was and was told she was a young woman
named Sundari who belonged to a large religious sect in Savatthi. The bhikkhus
recognized the name as belonging to an attractive young woman who in recent
months had attended several Dharma talks at the monastery. The bhikkhus told
the police there was no chance her body would be found at Jetavana, but the
police insisted on looking anyway. To everyone’s surprise, they found the body
buried in a shallow grave not too distant from the Buddha’s hut. No one could
understand how she had died and why she had been buried there. After the
police departed with the body, the Buddha told the bhikkhus to go out begging as
usual.
   “Dwell in mindfulness,” he told them.
   Later that same day, members Sundari’s sect carried her body throughout the
city, wailing in loud voices. They stopped at intervals and cried out to the people,
“This is the body of Sundari! Her broken body was discovered in a shallow
grave at Jetavana Monastery. Those monks who claim to come from the noble
line of Sakya, who claim to live chaste, pure lives—they raped Sundari, killed
her, and then tried to hide her body! Their talk of loving kindness, compassion,
joy, and equanimity is nothing but a sham! See for yourselves!”


   The citizens of Savatthi were disturbed. Even some of the most solid disciples
of the Buddha felt their faith waver. Others were convinced that the whole affair
had been orchestrated to harm the Buddha’s reputation, and they suffered deeply.
Other spiritual sects which felt threatened by the Buddha seized the opportunity
to openly condemn and malign the sangha. The bhikkhus were interrogated and
heckled wherever they went. They did their best to maintain their serenity and to
dwell in mindfulness, but it was difficult, especially for bhikkhus still new to the
practice. Many young bhikkhus felt shamed and no longer wanted to beg in the
city.
   The Buddha gathered the bhikkhus together one afternoon and spoke to them.
“Unjust accusations can occur anywhere at any time. There is no need for you to
feel ashamed. The only cause for shame would be if you ceased your efforts to
live your pure life of practice. This false accusation will spread and then it will
pass away. Tomorrow when you go begging, if anyone asks you about this affair,
simply answer, ‘Whoever is responsible will reap the fruits.’”
   The bhikkhus were much comforted by the Buddha’s words.
   Meanwhile, Lady Visakha, who was greatly disturbed over the affair, went to
see Sudatta. Together they discussed the matter at some length. They agreed to
secretly hire someone to make an investigation in order to uncover the real
culprits. They shared their plan with Prince Jeta who agreed to help them.
   Within seven days, the secret investigator discovered who the actual killers
were. The two men responsible became drunk and began to argue over their
spoils. In their angry, drunken state, they let the truth slip out. Royal police were
summoned and the men were arrested. They made a confession and told the
police how they were hired by the leaders of Sundari’s sect to kill her and bury
her near the Buddha’s hut.
   King Pasenadi visited Jetavana at once to share the news that the killers had
been found. He expressed his unwavering faith in the sangha and his joy that the
truth would now be known to all the people. The Buddha asked the king to
forgive those responsible for the crime. He also said that similar crimes could
happen again unless people learned to overcome their hatred and jealousy.
   The people of Savatthi once again regarded the bhikkhus with great
admiration and respect.


                              Chapter Fifty-Five
                       Appearance of the Morning Star
One day the Buddha and Ananda visited a small monastery located just outside
the city. They arrived when most of the bhikkhus were out begging. As they
strolled around the monastery grounds, they suddenly heard a pitiful groan
coming from one of the huts. The Buddha entered the hut and found an
emaciated bhikkhu curled up in one corner. A terrible stench filled the air. The
Buddha knelt beside him and asked, “Brother, are you ill?”
   The bhikkhu answered, “Lord, I have dysentery.”
   “Isn’t anyone looking after you?”
   “Lord, the other brothers have gone out begging. There is no one here but me.
When I first fell ill, several of the brothers did try to care for me, but when I saw
I was of no use to anyone, I told them not to bother with me anymore.”
   The Buddha told Ananda, “Go fetch some water. We will bathe our brother.”
   Ananda brought a bucket of water and helped the Buddha bathe the sick
bhikkhu. They changed his robe and lifted him back onto his bed. The Buddha
and Ananda then scrubbed the floor and washed the bhikkhu’s soiled robes.
They were hanging the robes out to dry when the other bhikkhus returned.
Venerable Ananda asked them to boil some water and prepare medicine for their
brother.
   The community invited the Buddha and Ananda to eat with them. After the
meal, the Buddha asked them, “From what illness is the bhikkhu in that hut
suffering?”
   “Lord Buddha, he has dysentery.”
   “Has anyone been caring for him?”
   “Lord Buddha, at first we tried to look after him but then he asked us not to.”
   “Bhikkhus, when we leave our homes to follow the Way, we leave parents and
family behind. If we don’t look after each other when we are sick, who will? We
must care for one another. Whether the ill person is a teacher, a student, or a
friend, we must tend to him until he has regained his health. Bhikkhus, if I were
sick, would you tend to my needs?”
   “Yes, certainly, Lord Buddha.”


   “Then you must tend to the needs of any bhikkhu who falls ill. Caring for any
bhikkhu is the same as caring for the Buddha.”
   The bhikkhus joined their palms and bowed.
   The next summer the Buddha stayed at Eastern Park in Savatthi at the same
time that Bhikkhuni Mahapajapati was teaching a large community of nuns in
Savatthi. She was assisted by Bhikkhuni Khema, who once had been one of
King Bimbisara’s wives. She had become a disciple of the Buddha twenty years
earlier. At that time her profound natural insight was somewhat marred by her
arrogance, but after receiving instruction from the Buddha, she learned humility.
After only four years of practice as a lay disciple, she asked to be ordained. She
was most diligent in her practice and was now an important teacher and leader
among the nuns. Lady Visakha regularly visited her and the other bhikkhunis.
One day she invited Sudatta—also known as Anathapindika, the philanthropist
who had purchased the Jeta Grove for the sangha—to accompany her. She
introduced him to Sisters Khema, Dhammadinna, Utpalavanna, and Patacara.
Lady Visakha later told him that she knew them before they became nuns.
   Another day Sudatta visited the bhikkhunis’ center with a male friend also
named Visakha, who was a relative of Bhikkhuni Dhammadinna, a well-known
teacher among the nuns. The two men listened to Bhikkhuni Dhammadinna give
a Dharma talk on the five skandhas and the Noble Eightfold Path. Visakha was
astonished by her profound grasp of subtle truths. When he returned to Jetavana,
he told the Buddha everything Bhikkhuni Dhammadinna had said.
   The Buddha replied, “If you asked me about the same subjects, I would have
said the very same things as Sister Dhammadinna. She has truly grasped the
teaching of emancipation and enlightenment.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda and said, “Ananda, please remember Sister
Dhammadinna’s discourse and repeat it to the entire community of monks. Her
discourse is an important one.”
   Bhikkhuni Bhadda Kapilani was also renowned for her grasp of the Dharma.
Like Sister Dhammadinna, she was often invited to travel to offer teaching.
   The story of Bhikkhuni Patacara was heart-wrenching. She was the only
daughter of a wealthy family in Savatthi. Her parents were overly protective of
her and never allowed her to leave the house. All day long she was required to
stay inside. Thus, she never had a chance to meet many people. When she
reached an age suitable for marriage, she fell in love, without her parents’
knowledge, with a young servant in their household. When her parents arranged
for her to marry the son of another wealthy family, Patacara urged her secret


lover to run away with her. Early on the morning she was to be married, she
disguised herself as a servant girl and pretended to go outside to fetch water. As
soon as she was outside, she met her lover and they fled to a distant village
where they were married.
   Three years later Patacara became pregnant. When she neared her time, she
asked her husband to take her to her parents’ house to give birth there, as was the
custom. Her husband was reluctant but because she insisted, he agreed. But
halfway there, Patacara went into labor and delivered a son. As there was no
longer any need to return to her parents’ home, they went back to their own
village.
   Two years later, Patacara was again with child. Again she insisted her husband
take her to her parents’ house. This time they met with tragedy. Along the way, a
storm broke, just as she was going into labor. Her husband asked her to wait by
the side of the road while he entered the forest to cut some branches to make a
shelter. Patacara waited for a long time, but her husband did not return. In the
middle of the night, surrounded by rain and wind, she gave birth to a second son.
At dawn, she lifted her newborn son in one arm and held her other son’s hand,
and entered the forest to look for her husband. She found him dead from a
poisonous snake bite. She wept bitterly for a long time. Then she stood up and
headed with her two sons towards her old home in Savatthi. At last she reached
the river. The waters were swollen from the rain, making the water too deep for
her first son to wade across. She told him to wait on the bank while she carried
the baby safely to the other side first. She held the infant over her head as she
walked through the deep waters. When she was halfway across, a mighty eagle
swept down and grabbed the baby in its talons. She screamed at the bird to
release her child, but it flew away. When her other son heard her cries, he
thought she was calling him to join her. When Patacara turned around, she saw
him stepping into the rushing waters. She shouted at him to wait, but it was too
late. The strong currents swept him away, and she was unable to save him.
   At last, Patacara crossed to the other shore, and collapsed on the banks. When
she came to, she stood up and walked for several days until she reached Savatthi.
When she finally arrived, she learned that her parents’ home had been destroyed
in the storm and both her parents killed when a wall collapsed on them. Patacara
had returned on the same day her parents’ bodies were being cremated.
   Patacara collapsed by the side of the road. She no longer wanted to live. Some
people took pity on her and took her to see the Buddha. He listened to her tell
her story, and he told her in a gentle voice, “Patacara, you have suffered terribly.


But life is not only suffering and misfortune. Be brave! Practice the Way of
Enlightenment, and one day you will be able to smile even at your most painful
sufferings. You will learn how to create new peace and joy in the present and for
the future.”
   Patacara bowed and asked to take the refuges. The Buddha entrusted her to
Sister Mahapajapati’s care. Soon afterwards Patacara was ordained as a
bhikkhuni. She was deeply loved by Sister Mahapajapati and the other
bhikkhunis. After several years of practice, she learned to smile again. One day,
while washing her feet, she watched the streams of water disappear back into the
earth, and she had sudden insight into the nature of impermanence. She held that
image in her mind during her meditation for several days and nights, and one
dawn, she broke through the problem of birth and death. Spontaneously, she
wrote a poem:
     The other day, while washing my feet,
     I watched the streams of water flow
     back into the heart of the earth.
     I asked, “To where does the water return?”
     Contemplating in serene silence,
     mind and body held in mindfulness,
     I looked into the nature of the six sense objects
     with the spirit of a strong, quick horse.
     Staring at the oil lamp wick,
     I concentrated my mind.
     Time passed quickly.
     The oil lamp still shone.
     I took a needle
     and pushed the wick down.
     The light was instantly extinguished,
     submerging all in darkness.
     The flame was extinguished,
     but suddenly my soul was bright.


      My mind was released from all bondage
      as the morning star appeared.
   When Patacara presented her poem to Sister Mahapajapati, the abbess gave it
her deepest praises.
   Sister Uppalavanna was another bhikkhuni who came to the Dharma after
great suffering, thanks to the efforts of Venerable Moggallana. She was a woman
of uncommon beauty, even with her head shaved. She was most diligent in her
practice and one of Abbess Pajapati’s finest assistants.
   Venerable Moggallana met Sister Uppalavanna one day while he was walking
past a city park. She was standing there, a flower of the night. She was known to
men as Beautiful Lotus. Indeed, her beauty surpassed that of even the most
lovely lotus flower. But Venerable Moggallana saw the suffering in her eyes. He
knew she hid many sorrows in her heart. He stopped and said, “You are indeed
beautiful and dressed in the finest garments, but I can see that you are filled with
suffering and confusion. Your burden is heavy, and yet you continue to pursue a
path that leads to even more darkness.”
   Uppalavanna was taken aback by Moggallana’s ability to read her innermost
thoughts. But she pretended to be nonplussed and retorted, “Perhaps what you
say is true, but this is the only path I have.”
   Moggallana said, “Why be so pessimistic? No matter what your past has been
like, you can transform yourself and create a better future. Soiled clothes can be
washed. A heart burdened by confusion and weariness can be purified by the
waters of enlightenment. The Buddha teaches that everyone has the capacity to
awaken and find peace and joy.”
   Uppalavanna began to weep. “But my life is filled with sinful deeds and
injustices. I’m afraid that even the Buddha cannot help me.”
   Moggallana comforted her. “Don’t worry. Please share your story with me.”
   Uppalavanna told Venerable Moggallana that she was the daughter of a
wealthy family. She was married at sixteen. Soon after her husband’s father died,
her mother-in-law began sleeping with her own son, Uppalavanna’s husband.
Uppalavanna gave birth to a daughter, but unable to endure the incestuous
relationship of her husband and mother-in-law, she ran away, leaving her
daughter behind. Some years later, she met and married a merchant. When she
learned he was secretly keeping a concubine, she investigated until she
uncovered the horrible truth that his concubine was the very daughter she had
abandoned years earlier.
   Her pain and bitterness were so great that she began to hate all the world. She


no longer loved or trusted anyone. She became a courtesan and sought money,
jewels, and material pleasures for solace. She confessed she had even been
thinking of trying to seduce Moggallana when he passed by as a means to expose
humanity’s false virtue.
   Beautiful Lotus covered her face and sobbed. Moggallana let her cry to ease
her pain. Then he spoke to her about the Dharma and took her to meet the
Buddha. The Buddha spoke words of comfort to her and asked if she would like
to study with the bhikkhunis under the guidance of Abbess Gotami. She was
ordained and after only four years of diligent practice was considered by all as
an exceptional example for everyone.


BOOK THREE

                             Chapter Fifty-Six
                        Full Awareness of Breathing
Sometimes the Buddha or one of his senior disciples gave a Dharma talk at the
bhikkhunis’ monastery. Once a month, the bhikkhunis also attended Dharma
discourses at Jetavana or Eastern Park. One year, thanks to a suggestion made by
Venerable Sariputta, the Buddha extended the retreat season an extra month.
Sariputta knew that by extending the retreat one month, many bhikkhus and
bhikkhunis from distant centers would be able to travel to Savatthi for direct
teaching from the Buddha after they had concluded the retreats at their own
centers. And indeed, many came. Lay patrons Sudatta, Visakha, and Mallika
used all the means at their disposal to provide food and dwelling for nearly three
thousand monks and nuns. The Pavarana ceremony, held at the end of each
rainy-season retreat, fell on the full moon day of the month of Kattika that year,
rather than Assayuja.
   When the full moon day of Kattika arrived, kumudi flowers were blossoming
everywhere. Because the kumudi, a white lotus, always blossomed at the same
time each year, the full moon day of Kattika was called Kumudi Day. That
evening the Buddha and his three thousand disciples sat beneath the radiant full
moon. The delicate fragrance of lotus flowers drifted up from the lake. The
bhikkhus and bhikkhunis sat silently as the Buddha looked out over the
community, and praised them for their diligence. The Bud-dha used this special
occasion to deliver the Sutra on the Full Awareness of Breathing.
That evening under the full moon, the Buddha delivered the Sutra on the Full
Awareness of Breathing to 3,000 disciples.


   Of course, every bhikkhu and bhikkhuni present had been taught the method
on the awareness of breathing. But this was the first time that most of them had
an opportunity to hear this teaching directly from the Buddha. This was also the
first time the Buddha compiled and summarized all his previous teachings on the
awareness of breathing. Venerable Ananda listened intently, knowing that this
sutra would be an important one to transmit to all the sangha’s centers.
   Bhikkhuni Yasodhara, Rahula’s mother, and his sister Bhikkhuni Sundari
Nanda were among those assembled. They both had been ordained several years
earlier under the guidance of Bhikkhuni Gotami. They practiced in a monastery
north of Kapilavatthu founded by Bhikkhuni Gotami. Yasodhara had requested


to be ordained just six months after her mother-in-law, and after one year of
practice she became one of Bhikkhuni Gotami’s chief assistants.
   The bhikkhunis did their best to attend all the retreat seasons in Savatthi in
order to receive direct teaching from the Buddha and his senior disciples. Queen
Mallika and Lady Visakha were wholehearted supporters of the nuns. For two
years the nuns were given a place in the Imperial Gardens to stay, but by the
third year they had their own nunnery, thanks to the generous patronage of the
Queen and Lady Visakha. Because she was growing old, Bhikkhuni Gotami
devoted careful attention to training new leaders among the bhikkhunis,
including Bhikkhunis Yasodhara, Sela, Vimala, Soma, Mutta, and Naduttara. All
of them were present that evening in Eastern Park. Venerable Svasti was
introduced to Sister Yasodhara and Sister Sundari Nanda by Venerable Rahula.
He was deeply moved to meet them at last.
   The Buddha delivered the sutra:
   “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, the method of the Full Awareness of Breathing, if
developed and practiced continuously, will bring great rewards and advantages.
It will lead to success in practicing the Four Establishments of Mindfulness and
the Seven Factors of Awakening, which will give rise to Understanding and
Liberation.
   “One practices as follows:
   “The first breath: ‘Breathing in a long breath, I know I am breathing in a long
breath. Breathing out a long breath, I know I am breathing out a long breath.’
   “The second breath: ‘Breathing in a short breath, I know I am breathing in a
short breath. Breathing out a short breath, I know I am breathing out a short
breath.’
   “These two breaths enable you to cut through forgetfulness and unnecessary
thinking, at the same time giving rise to mindfulness and enabling you to
encounter life in the present moment. Forgetfulness is the absence of
mindfulness. Breathing with awareness enables us to return to ourselves and to
life.
   “The third breath: ‘Breathing in, I am aware of my whole body. Breathing out,
I am aware of my whole body.’
   “This breath enables you to contemplate the body and be in direct contact with
your own body. Awareness of the whole body and awareness of every part of the
body allows you to see the wondrous presence of your body and the process of
birth and death unfolding in your body.
   “The fourth breath: ‘I am breathing in and making my whole body calm and at


peace. I am breathing out and making my whole body calm and at peace.’
   “This breath helps you realize calmness and peace in the body and arrive at a
state in which mind, body, and breath are one harmonious reality.
   “The fifth breath: ‘I am breathing in and feeling joyful. I am breathing out and
feeling joyful.’
   “The sixth breath: ‘I am breathing in and feeling happy. I am breathing out
and feeling happy.’
   “With these two breaths, you cross into the domain of feelings. These two
breaths create peace and joy that can nourish mind and body. Thanks to the
cessation of dispersion and forgetfulness, you return to yourself, aware of the
present moment. Happiness and joy arise within you.
   “You dwell in the wonders of life, able to taste the peace and joy mindfulness
brings. Thanks to this encounter with the wonders of life, you are able to
transform neutral feelings into pleasant feelings. These two breaths thus lead to
pleasant feelings.
   “The seventh breath: ‘I am breathing in and am aware of the activities of the
mind in me. I am breathing out and am aware of the activities of the mind in
me.’
   “The eighth breath: ‘I am breathing in and making the activities of the mind in
me calm and at peace. I am breathing out and making the activities of the mind
in me calm and at peace.’
   “These two breaths enable you to look deeply at all the feelings arising within
you, whether they are pleasant, unpleasant, or neutral, and enable you to make
those feelings calm and at peace. The ‘activities of the mind’ mean, in this case,
the feelings. When you are aware of your feelings and can see deeply into their
roots and nature, you can control them and make them calm and at peace, even
though they may be unpleasant thoughts which arise from desire, anger, and
jealousy.
   “The ninth breath: ‘I am breathing in and am aware of my mind. I am
breathing out and am aware of my mind.’
   “The tenth breath: ‘I am breathing in and making my mind happy and at
peace. I am breathing out and making my mind happy and at peace.’
   “The eleventh breath: ‘I am breathing in and concentrating my mind. I am
breathing out and concentrating my mind.’
   “The twelfth breath: ‘I am breathing in and liberating my mind. I am breathing
out and liberating my mind.’
   “With these four breaths you cross into the third domain, which is the mind.


The ninth breath enables you to recognize all the states of the mind, such as
perceptions, thinking, discrimination, happiness, sadness, and doubt. You
observe and recognize these states in order to see deeply into the mind’s
activities. When the mind’s activities are observed and recognized, you are able
to concentrate your mind, making it quiet and at peace. This is brought about by
the tenth and eleventh breaths. The twelfth breath enables you to release all
obstacles of the mind. Thanks to illuminating your mind, you can see the roots of
all mental formations, and thus overcome all obstacles.
   “The thirteenth breath: ‘I am breathing in and observing the impermanent
nature of all dharmas. I am breathing out and observing the impermanent nature
of all dharmas.’
   “The fourteenth breath: ‘I am breathing in and observing the fading of all
dharmas. I am breathing out and observing the fading of all dharmas.’
   “The fifteenth breath: ‘I am breathing in and contemplating liberation. I am
breathing out and contemplating liberation.’
   “The sixteenth breath: ‘I am breathing in and contemplating letting go. I am
breathing out and contemplating letting go.’
   “With these four breaths, the practitioner passes into the domain of objects of
the mind, and concentrates the mind in order to observe the true nature of all
dharmas. First is the observation of the impermanent nature of all dharmas.
Because all dharmas are impermanent, they must all fade. When you clearly
understand the impermanent and fading nature of all dharmas, you are no longer
bound by the endless cycle of birth and death. Thanks to that, you can let go and
attain liberation. Letting go does not mean to disdain or run away from life.
Letting go means letting go of craving and clinging so you do not suffer from the
endless cycle of birth and death to which all dharmas are subject. Once you have
let go and attained liberation, you can live in peace and joy in the very midst of
life. There is no longer anything which can bind you.”
   So taught the Buddha how to observe deeply the body, feelings, mind, and
objects of mind through the sixteen methods of conscious breathing. He also
applied the sixteen exercises to the practice of the Seven Factors of Awakening,
which are full attention, investigating dharmas, energy, joy, ease, concentration,
and letting go.
   Venerable Svasti had already heard the Sutra on the Four Establishments of
Mindfulness. He now felt that, thanks to this Sutra on the Full Awareness of
Breathing, he could more deeply penetrate the Four Establishments. He saw how
these two sutras complemented one another and how fundamental they both


were to the practice of meditation.
   Three thousand bhikkhus and bhikkhunis joyously received the Buddha’s
teaching that night beneath the light of the full moon. Svasti’s heart filled with
gratitude to Venerable Sariputta for having made this night possible.
   One day Venerable Ahimsaka returned from begging covered with blood and
barely able to walk. Svasti ran to help him. Ahimsaka asked to be taken to the
Buddha. He explained that while he was out begging in the city, some people
recognized him as the former Angulimala. They cornered him and began to beat
him. Ahimsaka did not resist their blows, but joined his hands to form a lotus
bud while allowing them to vent their anger and hatred. They battered him until
he was vomiting blood.
   When the Buddha saw that Ahimsaka was hurt, he called to Ananda to get a
basin of water and a towel to wash away the blood. He asked Svasti to gather
medicinal leaves to make into poultices to place on Ahimsaka’s wounds.
   Although he was in great pain, Venerable Ahimsaka did not cry out. The
Buddha said, “Your sufferings today can rinse away all the sufferings of the past.
Enduring suffering in love and awareness can erase the bitter hatred of a
thousand lifetimes. Ahimsaka, your robe has been torn to shreds. Where is your
bowl?”
   “Lord, they shattered it.”
   “I will ask Ananda to find you a new robe and bowl.”
   As Svasti applied poultices to Ahimsaka’s wounds, he realized what an
example of nonviolence Ahimsaka was. Venerable Ahimsaka told Svasti a story
that had taken place only the day before when he was out begging.
   Beneath a tree in the forest, Ahimsaka encountered a woman in labor. She was
in extreme pain and unable to give birth to the child. Ahimsaka cried out, “Such
terrible pain!” and ran to ask the Buddha what could be done.
   The Buddha said, “Run back to her and tell her, ‘Madam, from the day I was
born I have never intentionally harmed any living being. By that merit, may you
and your child be peaceful and safe.’”
   Ahimsaka protested, “I would be lying if I said such a thing! The truth is I
have harmed a great many living beings.”
   The Buddha said, “Then go and tell her, ‘Madam, since the day I was born in
the noble Dharma, I have never intentionally harmed any living being. By that
merit, may you and your child be peaceful and safe.’”
   Ahimsaka ran back to the forest and spoke those words. Within a few minutes,
the woman safely gave birth to her child.


  Venerable Ahimsaka had traveled far along the path, earning the Buddha’s
highest praises.


                            Chapter Fifty-Seven
                           The Raft Is Not the Shore
That winter the Buddha stayed in Vesali. One day while he was meditating not
far from Kutaragasala Dharma Hall, several bhikkhus committed suicide in
another part of the monastery. When the Buddha was informed, he asked what
led them to kill themselves. He was told that after meditating on the
impermanent and fading nature of the body, these bhikkhus expressed aversion
for the body and no longer wished to live. The Buddha was saddened to hear
this. He called all the remaining bhikkhus together.
   He said, “Bhikkhus, we meditate on impermanence and fading in order to see
into the true nature of all dharmas so that we will not be bound by them.
Enlightenment and freedom cannot be attained by escaping the world. They can
only be attained when one sees deeply into the true nature of all dharmas. These
brothers did not understand and so they foolishly sought to escape. By doing so,
they violated the precept against killing.
   “Bhikkhus, a liberated person neither clings to dharmas nor feels aversion to
them. Clinging and aversion are both ropes that bind. A free person transcends
both in order to dwell in peace and happiness. Such a happiness cannot be
measured. A free person does not cling to narrow views about permanence and a
separate self nor does he cling to narrow views about impermanence and non-
self. Bhikkhus, study and practice the teaching intelligently in a spirit of non-
attachment.” And the Buddha taught the bhikkhus the practice of conscious
breathing to help them refresh themselves.
   When he returned to Savatthi, the Buddha gave further teaching on breaking
through attachment in response to a bhikkhu named Arittha, who was bound to
narrow views because he also misunderstood the teaching. Sitting before the
bhikkhus at Jetavana, the Buddha said, “Bhikkhus, if the teaching is
misunderstood, it is possible to become caught in narrow views which will
create suffering for oneself and others. You must listen to, understand, and apply
the teaching in an intelligent manner. Someone who understands snakes uses a
forked stick to pin down a snake’s neck before trying to pick it up. If he picks the
snake up by the tail or body, the snake can easily bite him. Just as you would use


your intelligence in catching a snake, you should use it to study the teaching.
   “Bhikkhus, the teaching is merely a vehicle to describe the truth. Don’t
mistake it for the truth itself. A finger pointing at the moon is not the moon. The
finger is needed to know where to look for the moon, but if you mistake the
finger for the moon itself, you will never know the real moon.
   “The teaching is like a raft that carries you to the other shore. The raft is
needed, but the raft is not the other shore. An intelligent person would not carry
the raft around on his head after making it across to the other shore. Bhikkhus,
my teaching is the raft which can help you cross to the other shore beyond birth
and death. Use the raft to cross to the other shore, but don’t hang onto it as your
property. Do not become caught in the teaching. You must be able to let it go.
   “Bhikkhus, all the teaching I have given you, such as the Four Noble Truths,
the Noble Eightfold Path, the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, the Seven
Factors of Awakening, Impermanence, Non-self, Suffering, Emptiness,
Signlessness, and Aimlessness, should be studied in an intelligent, open manner.
Use the teachings to help you reach liberation. Do not become attached to them.”
   The monastery for bhikkhunis housed five hundred nuns. They frequently
invited the Buddha and other Venerables from Jetavana to come and give them
Dharma talks. Venerable Ananda was asked by the Buddha to be in charge of
selecting which monks should go to deliver Dharma talks to the bhikkhunis. One
day he assigned Venerable Bhanda to go. Venerable Bhanda had attained deep
fruits in his practice, but he was not noted for his speaking talent. The following
day, after begging and eating his meal alone in the forest, he went to the
bhikkhunis’ center. The sisters warmly received him and Bhikkhuni Gotami
invited him to sit on the pedestal to give his Dharma talk.
      After settling on his cushion, he recited a short poem:
      “Dwelling in tranquility,
      seeing the Dharma, returning to the source
      without hatred or violence,
      joy and peace overflow.
      Mindfulness is held perfectly;
      True peace and ease are realized.
      Transcending all desires
      is the greatest happiness.”
   The venerable said no more, but proceeded to enter into a state of deep


concentration. Though his words had been few, his presence radiated peace and
happiness, which most of the sisters found greatly encouraging. Some of the
younger sisters, however, were disappointed by how short his talk was. They
urged Bhikkhuni Gotami to ask if he might say something more. Bhikkhuni
Gotami bowed to Venerable Bhanda and expressed the wish of the younger
sisters. But Venerable Bhanda simply repeated the same poem again and then
stepped down from the pedestal.
   Some days later, the Buddha was told about Venerable Bhanda’s Dharma talk.
It was suggested to the Buddha that, in the future, monks more talented at
speaking should give the Dharma talks. But the Buddha replied that a person’s
presence was more important than his words.
   One morning after returning from his begging, the Buddha was unable to find
Ananda. Venerable Rahula and others said they had not seen him. Then one
bhikkhu reported that he had seen Ananda go begging in a nearby village of
untouchables. The Buddha asked that bhikkhu to go to the village and look for
Ananda. The bhikkhu found Ananda and returned with him to the monastery. He
also brought back two women, a mother and her daughter, whose name was
Prakriti.
   The Buddha listened to Ananda explain how he had been delayed that day.
One day several weeks before, on his way back to the monastery after begging,
Ananda suddenly felt thirsty. He stopped by the well in the untouchable village
for a drink. There he found Prakriti lifting a bucket of water from the well. She
was a beautiful young woman. Ananda asked her for a drink of water but she
refused. She told him she was an untouchable and did not dare pollute a monk by
offering him water.
   Ananda told her, “I do not need high rank or caste. I only need a drink of
water. I would be happy to receive it from you. Please don’t be afraid of
polluting me.”
   Prakriti offered him water at once. She felt drawn to this kind and handsome
monk who spoke so gently. She was smitten with love. At night she could not
sleep. All her thoughts were of Ananda. She waited by the well every day after
that in hopes of catching a glimpse of him. She persuaded her mother to invite
him to share a meal in their home. He accepted twice, but sensing that the young
woman had fallen in love with him, he refused additional invitations.
   Prakriti was lovesick. She grew thin and pale. Finally she confessed her
feelings to her mother. She said she wanted Ananda to renounce his vows and
marry her. Her shocked mother shouted at her and told her it was a foolish and


impossible love. But Prakriti said she would sooner die than give up Ananda.
Fearing for her daughter’s health, Prakriti’s mother prepared an aphrodisiac in
hopes she might get Ananda to respond to her daughter’s passion. She was from
the Matanga clan and knew a number of shamanistic potions.
Prakriti offered Ananda a drink of water from the well.
   That morning, Prakriti met Ananda on the street and implored him to accept
one last invitation to eat at their home. Ananda was confident he could offer
Prakriti and her mother teaching that would enable Prakriti to let go of her desire
for him. But he had no chance to teach anything before he drank the tainted tea.
His head began to swim and his limbs went weak. He realized at once what had
happened, and he turned to his breathing to counteract the effects of the herbs.
The bhikkhu sent by the Buddha found him in Prakriti’s hut, sitting perfectly still


in the lotus position.
   The Buddha gently asked Prakriti, “You love Bhikkhu Ananda deeply, don’t
you?”
   Prakriti answered, “I love him with all my heart.”
   “What is it you love about him? Is it his eyes, his nose, or perhaps his
mouth?”
   “I love everything about him—his eyes, his nose, his mouth, his voice, the
way he walks. Master, I love everything about him.”
   “Besides his eyes, nose, mouth, voice, and walk, Bhikkhu Ananda possesses
many beautiful qualities which you do not know yet.”
   “What qualities are those?” asked Prakriti.
   The Buddha answered, “His heart of love is one. Do you know what Bhikkhu
Ananda loves?”
   “Sir, I do not know what he loves. I only know that he doesn’t love me.”
   “You are mistaken. Bhikkhu Ananda does love you, but not in the way you
desire. Bhikkhu Ananda loves the path of liberation, freedom, peace, and joy.
Thanks to the liberation and freedom he experiences, Bhikkhu Ananda often
smiles. He loves all other beings. He wants to bring the path of liberation to all
others so that they too may enjoy freedom, peace, and joy. Prakriti, Bhikkhu
Ananda’s love comes from understanding and liberation. He does not suffer or
feel hopeless because of his love, unlike the way your love makes you feel. If
you truly love Bhikkhu Ananda, you will understand his love and you will allow
him to continue living the life of liberation he has chosen. If you knew how to
love in the way Bhikkhu Ananda does, you would no longer suffer and feel
hopeless. Your suffering and hopelessness result from your wanting Bhikkhu
Ananda all to yourself. That is a selfish kind of love.”
   Prakriti looked at the Buddha and asked, “But how can I love in the way that
Bhikkhu Ananda loves?”
   “Love in a way that will preserve the happiness of Bhikkhu Ananda as well as
your own happiness. Bhikkhu Ananda is like a fresh breeze. If you catch a
breeze and trap it in a prison of love, the breeze will soon die and no one will be
able to benefit from its coolness, including yourself. Love Ananda as you would
a refreshing breeze. Prakriti, if you could love like that, you could become a
cool, refreshing breeze yourself. You would relieve your own pains and burdens
and those of many others as well.”
   “Please, Master, teach me how to love in such a way.”
   “You can choose the same path as Bhikkhu Ananda. You can live a life of


liberation, peace, and joy, bringing happiness to others just as Bhikkhu Ananda
does. You could be ordained just as he is.”
   “But I am an untouchable! How can I be ordained?”
   “We have no caste in our sangha. Several untouchable men have already been
ordained as bhikkhus. Venerable Sunita, so highly regarded by King Pasenadi,
was an untouchable. If you wanted to become a bhikkhuni, you would be the
first nun to come from the untouchables. If you want, I will ask Sister Khema to
perform an ordination ceremony for you.”
   Overcome with joy, Prakriti prostrated herself before the Buddha and asked to
be ordained. The Buddha gave Prakriti into Sister Khema’s care. After the nun
and young woman departed, the Buddha looked at Ananda and then spoke to the
entire community.
   “Bhikkhus, Ananda’s vows are still intact, but I want all of you to be more
careful in your outside relations. If you dwell continuously in mindfulness, you
will see what is taking place both within and without you. Detecting something
early on will enable you to deal effectively with it. By practicing mindfulness
every moment of your daily life, you will be able to develop the concentration
needed to avoid situations such as this. When your concentration is strong and
stable, your vision will be clear and your actions timely. Concentration and
Understanding go hand and hand with each other. Each contains the other. They
are one.
   “Bhikkhus, regard women older than yourself as your mother or elder sister.
Regard women younger than yourself as your younger sister or daughter. Do not
let your attractions create difficulties for your practice. If necessary, until your
concentration is stronger, limit your contacts with women. Speak only words
which relate to the study and practice of the Way.”
   The bhikkhus were happy to receive the Buddha’s guidance.


                             Chapter Fifty-Eight
                         A Handful of Precious Earth
One day while out begging in a poor hamlet, the Buddha met some children
playing on a dirt path. They were building a city from dirt and sand, complete
with a city wall, storehouse, dwellings, and even a river. When the children saw
the Buddha and bhikkhus approaching, one child said to the others, “The Buddha
and bhikkhus are traveling past our city. It is only proper for us to make an
offering to them.”
   The other children liked the idea, but said, “What do we have to offer the
Buddha? We’re only children.”
   The first child answered, “Listen, my friends, there are great reserves of
harvested rice in the storehouse of our city of dirt and sand. We can offer some
of it to the Buddha.”
   The other children clapped their hands in delight. They dug out a handful of
dirt from their storehouse and, pretending it was rice, placed it on a leaf. The
first child lifted the leaf in his two hands and respectfully knelt before the
Buddha. The other children knelt beside him. He said, “The people of our city
respectfully offer this rice from our storehouse. We pray you will accept it.”
   The Buddha smiled. He patted the boy on the head and said, “Thank you,
children, for offering this precious rice to us. You are most thoughtful.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda and said, “Ananda, please take this offering and
as soon as we return to the monastery, we can mix it with water and daub it on
the earthen bricks of my hut.”
   Ananda took the handful of earth. The children invited the Buddha to sit with
them on a large rock beneath a nearby banyan tree. Ananda and the other
bhikkhus gathered around too.
   The Buddha told the children a story:
   “Many lives ago, there lived a prince named Visvantara. He was a very
generous and kind-hearted man. He always shared with the poor and needy,
never hesitating to part with anything he owned. His wife, Madri, was equally
generous. She knew how much pleasure it gave her husband to help others, and
she never expressed any regret about the things he gave away. They had a son


named Jalin and a daughter named Krishnajina.
   “During a famine, Prince Visvantara asked his father’s permission to distribute
rice and cloth from the imperial stores to the poor. The king consented. So great
was the people’s need that the stores were nearly exhausted. This caused alarm
to a number of imperial advisors. They wanted to devise a scheme that would
prevent the prince from giving any more away. First they told the king that the
prince’s indiscriminate giving would be the ruin of the kingdom. They revealed
that the prince had given away one of the treasured imperial elephants. At this,
even the king grew alarmed. He allowed his ministers to talk him into banishing
his only son to the remote mountains of Jayatura, where the prince would
experience firsthand the hardships of a simple life. Thus, Visvantara, Madri, and
the two children were sent into exile.
   “On their journey to the mountains, they met a poor beggar. The prince
removed his fine jacket and gave it to the man. When they encountered more
poor people, Madri removed her own fine jacket and gave it to them. Before
long, Jalin and Krishnajina had given away their jackets, as well. The family also
gave away their jewels and ornaments to needy people along the route. Before
they reached the mountains, they had given away everything they owned that
could be traded for food. At last, the prince gave away even their carriage and
two horses. The prince carried Jalin, and Madri lifted Krishnajina into her arms.
Without regrets, they walked until they reached Jayatura. They walked and sang
as though they didn’t have a care in the world. Their hearts felt light and free.
   It was a long trek, and Visvantara and Madri’s feet were swollen and bloody
by the time they made it to the remote mountains. They were lucky to find an
abandoned hut on the mountain slope. The hut had once belonged to a hermit.
They swept and tidied the hut and gathered leafy branches to make beds. In the
forest, they found an ample supply of wild fruits and greens to eat. The children
learned how to gather food, wash clothes in a mountain spring, sow seeds, and
tend a garden. The prince and his wife taught the children how to read and write
using large leaves for paper and thorns for pens.
   “Though their life was difficult, they were content. For three years they lived
in peace. But then one day when Prince Visvantara and Madri were out gathering
fruit deep in the forest, a stranger came and kidnapped the children. The prince
and his wife searched for many days throughout the forest and in nearby
villages, but they could not find a trace of their beloved children.
   “Finally, exhausted and discouraged, they returned to their hut, hoping against
hope that the children might have returned there on their own. Instead, they were


surprised to meet one of the king’s messengers waiting for them. They were
greatly relieved when he informed them that Jalin and Krishnajina were safe at
the palace with the king. When they asked how the children came to be there, the
messenger explained, ‘Several days ago, one of the palace ladies saw the
children being sold at a market in the capital. She recognized them as your
children, and she quickly returned to the palace to inform her husband, a royal
advisor. He ran to the market and told the merchant to take the children to the
palace where he could be assured of receiving a handsome price for them. The
king recognized his grandchildren even with their tattered clothes and soiled
faces. He realized how deeply he missed you and your family.’
   “The king asked, ‘Where did you find these children? How much are you
selling them for?’
   “Before the merchant could respond, the royal advisor spoke, ‘Your majesty,
the girl is being sold for one thousand pounds of gold and one thousand cattle.
The price for the boy is one hundred pounds of gold and one hundred cattle.’
   “Everyone, including the merchant and children, were surprised to hear these
words. The king asked, ‘Why is the girl so much more than the boy?’
   “The royal advisor replied, ‘You clearly value girls more than boys. You never
scold or punish the princesses for any indulgences. Even the palace servant girls
are treated with kindness and respect by you. You have only one son and yet you
exiled him to a remote mountain region where tigers and leopards roam and
where there is nothing but wild fruit to eat. Surely, you value girls more than
boys.’
   “The king was moved to tears. ‘Please say no more. I understand your
meaning.’
   “The king learned from the merchant that he had bought the children from
another man in the mountains. The king paid the merchant and then ordered him
to lead the imperial police to the kidnapper. The king embraced his two
grandchildren and asked them about their life in the mountains. He issued orders
for his son and daughter-in-law to be allowed to return to the capital. From then
on, the king cherished his son and generously assisted in the son’s efforts to
relieve the suffering of the poor.”
   The children liked the Buddha’s story very much. The Buddha smiled at them
and said, “Prince Visvantara was happy to share all he owned with others. Today,
you shared a handful of precious earth from your city’s storehouse with me. You
have made me very happy. You can make others happy by offering them some
small gift each day. It doesn’t have to be something you buy. When you pick a


flower by the rice fields and offer it to your parents, you make them happy. A
word of thanks or love can also be a precious gift. A kind look or a small gesture
of caring brings happiness to others. Offer such gifts every day to your family
and friends. The bhikkhus and I must go now, but we will always remember the
fine offering you made today.”
   The children promised they would invite more friends and go visit the Buddha
and bhikkhus at Jetavana. They wanted to hear more stories.
   The next summer the Buddha returned to Rajagaha to teach. Afterwards he
went to Vulture Peak. Jivaka paid him a visit and invited him to spend a few
days at the mango grove. The Buddha accepted the invitation, and Ananda
joined him. The physician’s mango grove was cool and refreshing. The trees
were in their eighth year of bearing fruit. Jivaka readied a small hut for the
Buddha and prepared vegetarian dishes for him every day. He suggested that the
Buddha rest from begging for a few days in order to rebuild his strength. He also
prepared an herbal tonic for the Buddha, made from roots, leaves, and fruits.
   One day as they sat together, Jivaka said, “Lord, some people say you let the
bhikkhus eat meat. They claim that Gautama tolerates the killing of animals to
feed himself and his students. Some even make wild accusations that Gautama
requires people to offer meat to the sangha. I know these things are not true, but
I would appreciate your thoughts on these matters.”
   The Buddha replied, “Jivaka, people do not speak the truth when they say I
allow animals to be killed to provide food for myself and the bhikkhus. I have, in
fact, spoken on this matter a number of times. If a bhikkhu sees someone killing
an animal for the purpose of offering it as food to the bhikkhu, the bhikkhu must
refuse it. Even if he doesn’t actually see the animal being killed, but is told it
was killed on his behalf, he must refuse it. Furthermore, if he merely suspects it
may have been killed on his behalf, he must refuse it. Jivaka, according to the
practice of begging, a bhikkhu accepts whatever is offered unless an animal has
been killed on the bhikkhu’s behalf. People who understand the bhikkhus’ vows
of compassion offer only vegetarian food to the monks. But sometimes a person
only has food that has been prepared with meat. Also, persons who have not had
previous contact with the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha do not know that
the bhikkhus prefer vegetarian food. In such situations, the bhikkhu accepts
whatever is offered to avoid offending the giver and to create an opportunity for
contact so that the person may learn about the Path of Liberation.
   “Jivaka, some day all the people will understand that bhikkhus do not want
animals to be killed. At that time, no one will offer meat to the bhikkhus, and the


bhikkhus will be able to eat only vegetarian food.”
   Jivaka said, “I believe that a vegetarian diet promotes better health. One feels
lighter and is less prone to illness. I have been a vegetarian for ten years now. It
is good for the health and for nurturing a heart of compassion. I am happy, Lord,
for receiving your clear teaching about this.”
   Jivaka also commended the sangha’s practice of being careful not to eat food
left over from the previous day. Food kept overnight could spoil and cause
illness. The Buddha thanked Jivaka and invited him to come to the monastery to
speak to the monks again about basic sanitary practices.


                            Chapter Fifty-Nine
                              The Net of Theories
Jivaka’s mango grove was tranquil and spacious. Scattered throughout the
orchard were small huts for the bhikkhunis. One evening, a young bhikkhuni
named Subha came to discuss a problem with the Buddha. She had completed
her begging and was returning to the mango grove by way of a deserted street,
when suddenly a young man appeared and stood in her way. She sensed his
dishonorable intentions, and began to observe her breath in order to remain calm
and clear-headed. She looked directly into his eyes and said, “Sir, I am a nun
who follows the Way of the Buddha. Please move out of my way so that I may
return to my nunnery.”
   The man said, “You are still young and very pretty. Why waste your life by
shaving your head and wearing yellow robes? Why live like an ascetic? Listen,
Miss, your lovely body should be clad in a silk sari from Kasi. Why, I’ve never
seen a woman as pretty as you. Let me show you the pleasures of the body.
Come with me.”
   Subha remained calm. “Don’t speak foolishly. I seek my happiness in a life of
liberation and enlightenment. The five categories of desire only lead to suffering.
Allow me to pass. I will be grateful for your understanding.”
   But the man refused. “Your eyes are so beautiful. I’ve never seen such
beautiful eyes. Don’t think I’m foolish enough to let you go. You will come with
me.”
   He reached out to grab her but Subha stepped out of reach and said, “Sir, do
not touch me. You must not violate a nun. Because I was weary of a life
burdened with craving and hatred, I chose the life of spiritual practice. You say
my eyes are beautiful. Very well, I will pluck them out and give them to you.
Better to be blind than violated by you.”
   Subha’s voice was full of determination. The man flinched. He knew she was
capable of doing what she said. He stepped back. Subha continued, “Don’t let
your desires cause you to commit crimes. Don’t you know that King Bimbisara
has issued a decree that anyone who harms a member of the Buddha’s sangha
will be dealt with severely? If you do not behave properly, if you threaten my


chastity or my life, you will be arrested and punished.”
   Suddenly the young man came to his senses. He saw how blind passion can
lead to suffering. He stepped out of the nun’s way to let her pass. He called after
her, “Please forgive me, Sister. I hope you attain your goal on the spiritual path.”
   Subha walked on without looking back.
   The Buddha praised the young nun for her courage and clarity. He said, “It is
dangerous for nuns to walk alone on deserted paths. That is one of the reasons I
hesitated initially to ordain women. Subha, from now on, no bhikkhuni should
travel alone. Whether crossing a river, entering a village to beg, or walking
through a forest or a field, no bhikkhuni should walk alone. No bhikkhuni should
sleep alone, either. Whether she sleeps in a nunnery, a small hut, or beneath a
tree, no bhikkhuni should sleep by herself. She should always travel and sleep
with at least one other bhikkhuni so they can watch out for each other and
protect each other.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda and instructed him, “Ananda, please make
careful note of this new rule. Request all the bhikkhuni elders to place this rule
in their precepts.”
   When the Buddha departed from Jivaka’s mango grove, he went to Nalanda,
accompanied by a large number of bhikkhus. They all walked slowly and
mindfully. Each bhikkhu observed his breath. Behind the bhikkhus traveled two
ascetics, Suppiyo and his disciple, Bramadatta. They spoke in loud voices about
the Buddha and his teaching. Suppiyo criticized and ridiculed the Buddha. Oddly
enough, his disciple countered his statements by commending the Buddha and
his teaching. The disciple spoke eloquently and convincingly to his teacher,
moving the bhikkhus who could not help but hear the conversation going on
behind them.
   That evening the bhikkhus stopped to rest in Ambalatthika, a lush forest that
belonged to the royal family. King Bimbisara had announced that all spiritual
seekers from all sects could use Ambalatthika to rest in whenever they needed.
Suppiyo and Bramadatta rested the night there, too.
   The next morning, the bhikkhus discussed among themselves the conversation
between the two ascetics. The Buddha heard them and said, “Bhikkhus,
whenever you hear someone criticize or ridicule me or the Dharma, do not give
rise to feelings of anger, irritation, or indignation. Such feelings can only harm
yourselves. Whenever you hear someone praise me or the Dharma, do not give
rise to feelings of happiness, pleasure, or satisfaction. That too will only harm
yourselves. The correct attitude is to examine the criticism to see what parts may


be true and what parts are not true. Only by doing that will you have a chance to
further your studies and make real progress.
   “Bhikkhus, most people who praise the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha possess
only superficial understanding. They appreciate how the bhikkhus lead chaste,
simple, and serene lives, but they do not see beyond that. Those who have
grasped the most subtle and profound depths of the Dharma speak few words of
praise. They understand the true wisdom of enlightenment. Such wisdom is
profound, sublime, and marvelous. It transcends all ordinary thoughts and words.
   “Bhikkhus, there are countless philosophies, doctrines, and theories in this
world. People criticize each other and argue endlessly over their theories.
According to my investigation, there are sixty-two main theories which underlie
the thousands of philosophies and religions current in our world. Looked at from
the Way of Enlightenment and Emancipation, all sixty-two of these theories
contain errors and create obstacles.”
   The Buddha proceeded to explain the sixty-two theories and expose their
errors. He spoke on the eighteen theories concerning the past—four theories of
eternalism, four theories of partial eternalism, four theories on the finitude and
infinity of the world, four theories of endless equivocation, and two theories that
claim that causality does not exist. He spoke about the forty-four theories that
concern the future—sixteen that allege the soul lives on after death, eight that
say there is no soul after death, eight that posit there is neither a soul that
continues after death nor ceases to continue after death, seven annihilistic
theories, and five theories that say that the present is already Nirvana. After
exposing all the errors contained in these theories, the Buddha said, “A good
fisherman places his net in the water and catches all the shrimp and fish he can.
As he watches the creatures try to leap out of the net, he tells them, ‘No matter
how high you jump, you will only land in the net again.’ He is correct. The
thousands of beliefs flourishing at present can all be found in the net of these
sixty-two theories. Bhikkhus, don’t fall into that bewitching net. You will only
waste time and lose your chance to practice the Way of Enlightenment. Don’t
fall into the net of mere speculation.
   “Bhikkhus, all these beliefs and doctrines have arisen because people have
been led astray by their perceptions and feelings. When mindfulness is not
practiced, it is impossible to see the true nature of perceptions and feelings.
When you can penetrate the roots and see into the true nature of your perceptions
and feelings, you will see the impermanent and interdependent nature of all
dharmas. You will no longer be caught in the net of desire, anxiety, and fear, or


the net of the sixty-two false theories.”
   After the Dharma talk, Venerable Ananda took a walk and focused his
attention on recalling every word the Buddha spoke. He thought, “This is an
important sutra. I will call it the Brahmajala Sutra, the Sutra of the Great Net.
This net collects all the false theories and dogmas of this world.”


                                Chapter Sixty
                             Lady Visakha’s Grief
After Ambalatthika, the Buddha went to teach in Nalanda, and then to Campa, a
large city in the state of Anga. Anga was a populous and fertile region under the
jurisdiction of King Bimbisara. There the Buddha dwelled in a cool forest by
Gaggara Lake, where many fragrant lotus flowers grew.
   People came in great numbers to listen to the Buddha teach. A young, wealthy
brahman named Sonadanda also came to meet the Buddha. Sonadanda was
known and admired in the region for his astute intelligence. Several of his
friends discouraged him from paying a visit to the Buddha. They felt a visit by
Sonadanda would grant too much prestige to the monk Gautama. Sonadanda
smiled and said that he did not want to pass up an opportunity to meet a man like
the Buddha, who was known to possess uncommon insight. Such a chance only
presented itself once in a thousand years, he said.
   “I must go to deepen my own knowledge,” said Sonadanda. “I want to see in
which areas Monk Gautama exceeds me and in which areas I exceed Monk
Gautama.”
   Several hundred brahmans decided to join Sonadanda. They walked to
Gaggara Lake, placing their faith in Sonadanda. They were sure he would show
the teaching of their caste to be superior to that of the Buddha. They knew
Sonadanda would not bring shame to the brahmans.
   When Sonadanda stood before the Buddha, who was already surrounded by
dense crowds, he faltered for a moment, not knowing how to begin. The Buddha
assisted him by speaking first. He said, “Sonadanda, can you tell us what
characteristics are essential to be a true brahman? If necessary, please cite the
Vedas as evidence.”
   Sonadanda was pleased. The Vedas were his particular field of specialty. He
said, “Monk Gautama, an authentic brahman possesses five characteristics—an
attractive appearance, skill in chanting and performing rituals, purity of blood
that can be traced back seven generations, virtuous action, and wisdom.”
   The Buddha asked, “Of those five characteristics, which are the most
essential? Can one still be a true brahman if any of the characteristics are


absent?”
   Sonadanda reflected and responded that the last two characteristics were the
only ones truly indispensable. Physical beauty, skill in chanting and performing
rituals, and purity of blood were not absolutely essential. Hearing Sonadanda say
this disturbed the five hundred brahmans that had accompanied him. They all
stood and shook their arms to challenge Sonadanda’s statements. They felt he
had been swayed by the Buddha’s questioning and that his responses were an
embarrassment to their caste.
   The Buddha turned to them and said, “Honored guests! If you have faith in
Sonadanda, please be quiet and allow him to continue speaking with me. If you
no longer have faith in him, ask him to sit down, and I will speak with any one
of you instead.”
   Everyone fell silent. Sonadanda looked at the Buddha and said, “Monk
Gautama, please allow me to address a few words to my friends.”
   Sonadanda turned to his fellows and pointed to a young man sitting in the
front row of their ranks. He said, “Do you see my cousin Angaka here? Angaka
is a handsome and elegant youth. His demeanor is refined and noble. Few,
except Monk Gautama, can compete with his handsome looks. Angaka is also
well versed in the Vedas. He possesses skill in chanting and performing rituals.
He can claim purity of blood traced back seven generations on both sides of his
family. No one can deny that he possesses these three characteristics. But let us
suppose that Angaka was a drunkard who murdered, robbed, raped, and lied. Of
what value would his attractive looks, chanting skills, and purity of blood be
then? Dear friends, we must admit that virtuous action and wisdom are the only
two characteristics truly essential to be a true brahman. This is a truth for all, not
just a private truth for Monk Gautama.”
   The crowds applauded with approval. When the applause died down, the
Buddha asked Sonadanda, “Of these two characteristics, virtuous action and
wisdom, is one more essential than the other?”
   Sonadanda answered, “Monk Gautama, virtuous action develops from
wisdom, and wisdom increases thanks to virtuous action. They cannot be
separated. It is like using one hand to wash the other, or using one foot to scratch
the other. Virtuous action and wisdom assist and nurture each other. Virtuous
action enables wisdom to shine forth. Wisdom enables action to grow ever more
virtuous. These two qualities are the most precious things in life.”
   The Buddha responded, “Excellent, Sonadanda! You speak the truth. Virtuous
action and wisdom are the two most precious things in life. Can you tell us


more? How can one develop virtuous action and wisdom to the highest degree?”
   Sonadanda smiled and joined his palms. He bowed to the Buddha and said,
“Master, please guide us. We know the principles, but you are the one who has
actually attained the true path. Please tell us how to develop virtuous action and
wisdom to the highest degree.”
   The Buddha spoke to them about the Path of Liberation. He told them of the
Three Steps to Enlightenment—Precepts, Concentration, and Understanding.
Observing the precepts develops concentration. Concentration leads to
understanding. Understanding enables one to practice the precepts more deeply.
The more deeply the precepts are observed, the greater one’s concentration
grows. The greater one’s concentration, the deeper one’s understanding. The
Buddha also spoke about meditating on dependent co-arising in order to break
through false concepts of permanence and a separate self. Meditating on
dependent co-arising enables one to cut the bonds of greed, anger, and
ignorance, in order to attain liberation, peace, and joy.
   Sonadanda listened spellbound. When the Buddha was finished, Sonadanda
stood up and joined his palms. He said, “Master Gautama, please accept my
gratitude. You have opened my eyes today. You have led me out of the darkness.
Please allow me to take refuge in the Buddha, the Dharma, and the Sangha. I
would also like to invite you and all the bhikkhus to my home tomorrow for a
meal offering.”
   The enthusiastic exchange that took place that day between the Buddha and
young Sonadanda sent waves throughout all levels of society in the region. A
large number of brahmana intellectuals became disciples of the Buddha,
including a well-known brahman named Ambattha and his teacher Pokkharasadi,
in the village of Lechanankala. As more and more young brahmans became
disciples of the Buddha, it became difficult to quell the jealousy and resentment
of certain brahmana leaders and leaders of other religious sects.
   While they were still staying in Ambalatthika, Svasti asked Venerable
Moggallana about the different religious movements of the times. Moggallana
summarized the main tenets of each sect for him.
   First of all, there was the sect of Purana Kassapa. His followers were skeptical
about morals and ethics, maintaining that good and evil were only concepts that
resulted from habit and convention.
   The followers of Makkhali Gosala were fatalists. They believed that one’s lot
in life was predetermined and beyond any individual’s power to change. If one
attained liberation after five hundred or a thousand years of reincarnation, it was


due to one’s predetermined fate and not to any special efforts.
   Ajita Kesakambali taught the doctrine of hedonism. He maintained that
humans were comprised of the four elements, earth, water, fire, and air. When
one died, nothing remained. According to this sect, one should experience as
much pleasure as possible while still alive.
   The sect headed by Pakudha Kaccayana took the opposite view. They believed
that one’s true soul and body could never be destroyed. They claimed that
humans were comprised of seven elements—earth, water, fire, air, suffering,
happiness, and life energy. Birth and death were merely outward forms that
resulted from the temporary combination and dissolution of the seven elements,
while one’s true essence was immortal and beyond destruction.
   Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana had belonged to the sect founded by
Sanjaya Belatthiputta. Sanjaya taught a doctrine of relativity. He believed that
truth changed according to circumstances, time, and place. What was true for
one situation might not be true for another. A person’s awareness was the
measuring rod of all things.
   Nigantha Nataputta led a sect of ascetics who practiced austerities. They did
not wear clothes and they strictly observed the precept against killing other
living beings. Nigantha taught a kind of dualistic fatalism. He believed that two
forces, jiva and ajiva, or life and non-life, were the basis of the universe. His sect
commanded great respect and influence in the society of the times. The bhikkhus
frequently came into contact with Nataputta’s ascetics. Both communities shared
a common respect for life. But there were many differences between the two
communities, and some of Nigantha’s followers bitterly opposed the bhikkhus.
Venerable Moggallana found the views of the ascetics too extreme and he did
not hesitate to express his opinion. Because of that, many of the ascetics were
particularly hostile to Venerable Moggallana.
   The Buddha returned to Savatthi and stayed in Eastern Park. There was a
constant stream of visitors. One morning Lady Visakha came to see him. Her
hair and clothes were drenched with rain. The Buddha asked her, “Visakha,
where have you been? Why are your clothes and hair so wet?”
   Lady Visakha wept. “Lord, my little grandson just died. I wanted to come see
you, but in my grief I forgot to take my hat or parasol to protect me from the
rain.”
   “How old was your grandson, Visakha? How did he die?”
   “Lord, he was only three years old. He died of typhoid fever.”
   “The poor little one. Visakha, how many children and grandchildren do you


have?”
   “Lord, I have sixteen children. Nine are married. I had eight grandchildren.
Now there are only seven.”
   “Visakha, you like having a lot of grandchildren, don’t you?”
   “Oh yes, Lord. The more the better. Nothing would make me happier than to
have as many children and grandchildren as there are people in Savatthi.”
   “Visakha, do you know how many people die each day in Savatthi?”
   “Lord, sometimes nine or ten, but at least one person dies every day in
Savatthi. There is no day without a death in Savatthi.”
   “Visakha, if your children and grandchildren were as numerous as the people
of Savatthi, your hair and clothes would be as soaked as they are today every
day.”
   Visakha joined her palms. “I understand! I really don’t want as many children
and grandchildren as there are people in Savatthi. The more attachments one has,
the more one suffers. You have often taught me this, but I always seem to
forget.”
   The Buddha smiled gently.
   Visakha told him, “Lord, you usually return from your travels only just before
the rainy season begins. Your disciples miss you greatly the rest of the year. We
come to the monastery but it seems empty without you. We walk around your
hut a few times and then return home, not knowing what else to do.”
   The Buddha said, “Visakha, diligent practice of the teaching is more important
than paying visits. When you come to the monastery, you have a chance to listen
to other Venerables teach the Dharma. You can ask them questions to assist you
in your practice. The teaching and the teacher are one. Please don’t neglect your
practice simply because I am not here.”
   Venerable Ananda, who was standing nearby, proposed an idea. “It would be
nice to plant a bodhi tree here at the monastery. That way, whenever disciples
come to visit and you are gone, they could visit the bodhi tree in your place.
They could even bow to it as though bowing to you. We could place a stone altar
beneath the tree where disciples could offer flowers. They could walk slowly
around the tree while practicing the contemplation of the Buddha.”
   Lady Visakha said, “That is a wonderful idea! But where will you find a bodhi
tree?”
   Ananda answered, “I can ask for a seed from the bodhi tree in Uruvela where
the Buddha attained Awakening. Don’t worry. I will acquire the seed, sprout it,
and tend the tree.”


  Lady Visakha felt lighter and comforted. She bowed to the Buddha and to
Venerable Ananda and then returned home.


                             Chapter Sixty-One
                                The Lion’s Roar
That same retreat season, Ananda asked a question about dependent co-arising,
and so the Buddha taught the bhikkhus about the twelve links in the chain of
existence.
   He explained, “The teaching on dependent co-arising is most profound and
subtle. Do not think it can be grasped through words and discourse. Bhikkhus,
thanks to hearing the teaching on dependent co-arising, Venerable Uruvela
Kassapa entered the path of true Dharma. Venerable Sariputta, another of our
most respected brothers, entered the path thanks to hearing a gatha concerning
dependent co-arising. Contemplate the nature of dependent co-arising during
every moment. When you look at a leaf or a raindrop, meditate on all the
conditions, near and distant, that have contributed to the presence of that leaf or
raindrop. Know that the world is woven of interconnected threads. This is,
because that is. This is not, because that is not. This is born, because that is born.
This dies, because that dies.
   “The birth and death of any dharma are connected to the birth and death of all
other dharmas. The one contains the many and the many contains the one.
Without the one, there cannot be the many. Without the many, there cannot be
the one. This is the marvelous truth of the teaching on dependent co-arising. If
you look deeply into the nature of all dharmas, you will be able to transcend all
anxiety concerning birth and death. You will break through the circle of birth and
death.
   “Bhikkhus, the interconnected links consist of many layers and levels, but
four realms can be distinguished—chief causes, contributory causes, the
immediately-preceding-moment as cause, and objects as cause.
   “A chief cause is the first condition necessary to give rise to a phenomenon.
For example, a grain of rice is the chief cause necessary to give rise to a rice
plant. Contributory causes are supportive conditions. In the case of a grain of
rice, these include sun, rain, and earth which enable the seed to grow into a rice
plant.
   “The immediately-preceding-moment as cause is an uninterrupted process and


serves as an underlying cause. Without this continual process, the rice plant’s
growth would be interrupted before reaching fruition. Objects as cause refer to
objects of consciousness. A grain of rice and all the near and distant conditions
that make the presence of the rice plant possible are objects of consciousness.
They cannot be separated from consciousness. Mind is a basic condition for the
existence of all dharmas.
   “Bhikkhus, suffering exists because of the presence of birth and death. What
gives rise to birth and death? Ignorance. Birth and death are first of all mental
notions. They are the product of ignorance. If you look deeply and penetrate the
causes of all things, you will overcome ignorance. Once you have overcome
ignorance, you will transcend all thoughts of birth and death. Transcending all
thoughts of birth and death, you will overcome all anxieties and sorrows.
   “Bhikkhus, there is the concept of death because there is the concept of birth.
These wrong views are based on a false view of the self. There is a false view of
the self because there is grasping. There is grasping because there is desire.
There is desire because one does not see into the true nature of feelings. One
does not see into the true nature of feelings because one is caught up in the
contact that takes place between the sense organs and their objects. One is
caught up in the contact that takes place between the sense organs and their
objects because one’s mind is not clear and calm. One’s mind is not clear and
calm because there are drives and impulses. These drives and impulses are due
to ignorance. These twelve links of the chain of existence are connected to each
other. In each link, you can see the other eleven links. If one link is missing, the
other eleven will be missing. These twelve links are Death, Birth, Becoming,
Grasping, Craving, Feelings, Contact, the Six Sense Organs, Name and Form,
Consciousness, Drives and Impulses, and Ignorance.
   “Bhikkhus, ignorance underlies all twelve links of the chain of existence.
Thanks to the contemplation on the nature of dependent co-arising, we can
dispel ignorance in order to transcend all anxieties and sorrows. An enlightened
person walks over the waves of birth and death and does not drown in them. An
enlightened person uses the twelve links of the chain of existence like the wheels
of a carriage. An enlightened person lives in the very midst of the world but is
never submerged by it. Bhikkhus, do not try to run away from birth and death.
You need only rise above them. Transcending birth and death is the attainment of
Great Beings.”
   In a Dharma discussion several days later, Venerable Mahakassapa reminded
the community that the Buddha had given the teaching on dependent co-arising


many times in the past, and that this teaching could be considered the heart of
the Way of Awakening. He reminded the community that the Buddha had once
used a bunch of reeds to illustrate the teaching on dependent co-arising. The
Lord had said that things do not need a creator, that they arise from one another.
Ignorance causes drives and impulses, and drives and impulses cause ignorance,
just as reeds lean on one another to stand, and if one reed falls, the other reeds
also fall. This is true of all things in the universe—the one creates the many, and
the many the one. If we look deeply, we can see the one in the many and the
many in the one.
   During that same retreat season, several brahmans conspired to falsely accuse
the Buddha of sleeping with a woman and making her pregnant. They found an
attractive, young brahmana woman named Cinca and told her that the Buddha
had caused a rapid decline in the faith of their ancestors by luring many young
men to become his disciples. Anxious to protect her faith, Cinca agreed to the
plan.
   Every day she went to Jetavana dressed in a beautiful sari and carrying a fresh
bouquet of flowers. She did not arrive in time for the Dharma talks, but waited
outside the Dharma hall as people left to return home. At first, whenever anyone
asked her where she was going or what she was doing, she only smiled. After
several days, she answered coyly, “I’m going where I’m going.” After several
weeks of such vague comments, she began to answer, “I’m going to visit Monk
Gautama.” And finally, she was heard to exclaim, “Sleeping at Jetavana is
delightful!”
   Such words burned the ears of many people. Some laypeople began to feel
doubts and suspicions, but no one said anything. One day, Cinca came to one of
the Buddha’s Dharma talks. Her belly was noticeably round. In the middle of the
Buddha’s discourse, she stood up and loudly said, “Teacher Gautama! You speak
eloquently about the Dharma. You are held in high esteem. But you care nothing
for this poor woman made pregnant by you. The child I carry is your own. Are
you going to take responsibility for your own child?”
   A wave of shock passed through the community. Everyone looked up at the
Buddha. The Buddha only smiled calmly and replied, “Miss, only you and I can
know whether or not your claims are true.”
   The Buddha’s calm smile made Cinca feel uneasy, but she retorted, “That’s
right, only you and I know whether my claims are true.”
   The community could no longer suppress their astonishment. Several people
stood up in anger. Cinca suddenly felt afraid the people would beat her. She


looked for a way to escape, but in her panic, she ran into a post and stumbled. As
she strained to stand back up, a large round block of wood fell from where it was
tied onto her abdomen, and landed on her foot. She cried out in pain and grabbed
her crushed toes. Her stomach was now perfectly flat.
   A sigh of relief rose from the crowd. Several people began laughing and
others derided Cinca. Bhikkhuni Khema stood up and gently assisted Cinca out
of the hall. When the two women were gone, the Buddha resumed his Dharma
talk as if nothing had happened.
   The Buddha spoke, “Community, the Way of Enlightenment can tear down the
walls of ignorance, just as light can disperse the shadows. The Four Noble
Truths, Impermanence, Non-self, Dependent Co-arising, the Four Establishments
of Mindfulness, the Seven Factors of Awakening, the Three Gates, and the Noble
Eightfold Path have all been proclaimed to the world like a lion’s roar, dispelling
countless false doctrines and narrow views. The lion is king of the beasts. When
he leaves his den, he stretches and gazes out over all the directions. Before
seeking his prey, he lets forth a mighty roar that causes the other creatures to
tremble and flee. Birds fly high, crocodiles dive beneath the water, foxes slip
into their holes. Even village elephants, decked in fancy belts and ornaments and
shaded by golden parasols, run away at the sound of that roar.
   “Community, the proclamation of the Way of Enlightenment is like that lion’s
roar! False doctrines fear and tremble. When Impermanence, Non-self, and
Dependent Co-arising are proclaimed, all those who have long sought false
security in ignorance and forgetfulness must awaken, celestial beings as well as
human beings. When a person sees the dazzling truth, he exclaims, ‘We
embraced dangerous views for so long, taking the impermanent to be permanent,
and believing in the existence of a separate self. We took suffering to be pleasure
and look at the temporary as if it were eternal. We mistook the false for the true.
Now the time has come to tear down all the walls of forgetfulness and false
views.’
   “Community, the Way of Enlightenment allows humanity to remove the thick
veil of false views. When an enlightened person appears, the Way echoes like the
majestic sound of the rising tide. When the tide rises, all false views are swept
away.
   “Community, people are easily caught by four traps. The first is attachment to
sensual desires. The second is attachment to narrow views. The third is doubt
and suspicion. The fourth is false view of self. The Way of Enlightenment helps
people overcome the four great traps.


   “Community, the teaching on dependent co-arising will enable you to
overcome every obstacle and trap. Contemplate the nature of interdependence in
your daily life—in your body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind.”
   The next day in the main hall, Ananda repeated the Buddha’s Dharma talk. He
named it Sutra of the Lion’s Roar.
   That retreat season, many bhikkhus fell ill with malaria. Many grew thin and
pale and no longer had the strength to go out begging for themselves. Other
bhikkhus readily shared their food with them, but much of the food contained
rice and curry, which was too harsh on the stomachs of the sick. The Buddha
gave permission to lay disciples to prepare special dishes for the sick bhikkhus.
They cooked food that was easily digested, such as rice porridge with
wholesome ingredients like honey, milk, cane sugar, and oil. Thanks to these
foods, the bhikkhus slowly regained their health.
   One day after sitting meditation, the Buddha heard the squawking of a great
number of crows. When he went to investigate, he found a number of bhikkhus
tossing the special foods prepared for the sick bhikkhus to the crows. They
explained that a number of brothers had felt too ill to eat that morning. The hour
of noon had passed and the bhikkhus were not to partake of food after noon.
When the Buddha asked why they didn’t save the special foods for the following
day, he was reminded that food was not to be kept overnight. The Buddha told
them that sick bhikkhus could be relieved of the precept not to eat anything after
the noon hour, and if certain foods would keep, they could be saved overnight.
   Not long after, a physician from the capital paid a visit to the Venerable
Sariputta. He suggested that sick bhikkhus be served a dish of special herbs and
ingredients. Thanks to that, the bhikkhus regained their health more quickly.


                             Chapter Sixty-Two
                                Sariputta’s Roar
When the retreat season ended, Venerable Sariputta bid farewell to the Buddha
before traveling to spread the Dharma. The Buddha wished him a calm and safe
journey, and a body and mind free of all cares. He said he hoped Sariputta’s
efforts to spread the Dharma would not meet with too many obstacles. Venerable
Sariputta thanked the Lord and then departed.
   That noon a bhikkhu came to the Buddha and complained of being mistreated
by Sariputta. He said, “I asked Venerable Sariputta where he was going. He
refused to answer me, and in fact, pushed me out of his way so hard that I was
knocked to the ground. He made no apology but continued on his way.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda and said, “I do not think Sariputta will have
traveled too far yet. Send one of the novices after him. Tonight we will hold a
community meeting in Jeta Dharma Hall.”
   Ananda did as the Buddha asked, and by late afternoon Venerable Sariputta
had returned to the monastery with the novice. The Buddha told him, “Sariputta,
tonight the entire community will meet in the Dharma hall. A bhikkhu has
accused you of knocking him to the ground without apologizing.”
   That afternoon Venerables Moggallana and Ananda visited all corners of the
monastery to announce the evening meeting. They said, “You are invited to
attend a meeting in the Dharma hall tonight. Tonight Brother Sariputta will have
a chance to offer his lion’s roar.”
   Not one bhikkhu was absent from the hall that evening. Everyone wanted to
see how Sariputta would respond to those who had for so long begrudged his
position in the sangha. Venerable Sariputta was one of the Buddha’s most trusted
disciples, and because of that he was the object of much misunderstanding and
jealousy. Some of the bhikkhus felt the Buddha placed too much trust in
Sariputta. They felt Sariputta wielded too great an influence. When some
bhikkhus were corrected by the Buddha, they mistakenly blamed Sariputta for
pointing out their errors to the Buddha. Some bhikkhus felt almost a hatred for
Sariputta. They were unable to forget that some years before, the Buddha had
invited Sariputta to share his seat.


   Venerable Ananda recalled one monk named Kokalika, who had lived at
Jetavana eight years earlier. Kokalika hated Sariputta and Moggallana so much
that not even the Buddha himself could persuade him otherwise. Kokalika said
that Sariputta and Moggallana were both hypocrites whose actions were
motivated by ambition. The Buddha met privately with him and said that these
two elders were sincere and that their actions arose from loving kindness. But
Kokalika’s mind was filled with jealousy and hatred, and finally, he left the
monastery, joined the Venerable Devadatta in Rajagaha, and became one of
Devadatta’s closest associates.
   It was because of these kinds of problems that Ananda had been reluctant to
accept the responsibility of becoming the Buddha’s attendant. Without the
conditions he had suggested, such as not sleeping in the same room or sharing
the same food with the Buddha, Ananda knew that many brothers would resent
him also. Some brothers felt they did not receive enough of the Buddha’s
attention. Ananda knew that such feelings could lead to anger and hatred, and
could even lead some to abandon the Buddha, their teacher.
   Ananda also recalled a woman in Kalmasadamya Village in Kosambi named
Magandika, who grew to hate the Buddha when she did not receive special
attention from him. She was a beautiful brahmana woman. The Buddha was
forty-four years old when she met him. She was immediately attracted to him
and as her feelings grew stronger, she longed to know if the Buddha felt any
special regard for her. Magandika did everything she could think of to receive
his special attention, but the Buddha treated her as he did everyone else. In the
end, her affections turned to hatred. When she later became the wife of King
Udena of Vamsa, she used her position and influence to spread rumors and
insults about the Buddha. She even pressured the authorities into forbidding the
Buddha to give public Dharma talks. When Samavati, a beloved concubine of
King Udena, became a disciple of the Buddha, Magandika found ways to make
her suffer. Disturbed by all of this, Ananda suggested to the Buddha that they
leave Kosambi to spread the Dharma in a more hospitable place. The Buddha
asked him, “If we go somewhere else and meet with insult and difficulty there
too, what should we do?”
   Ananda replied, “Move on to some other place.”
   The Buddha disagreed. “That would not be correct, Ananda. We must not
become discouraged every time we meet with difficulty. Solutions should be
sought in the very midst of hardship. Ananda, if we practice equanimity, we will
not be bothered by insults and slander. The people who slander us cannot harm


us. They only harm themselves. When a man spits at the sky, the sky is not
sullied. The spit falls back in the face of the one who spat.”
   Ananda had no worries about Sariputta’s ability to deal with the present
situation. Venerable Sariputta was rightfully trusted by the Buddha. He was a
truly virtuous and worthy elder of the sangha. Because of his deep insight, the
Buddha depended on his help in guiding the sangha. He was the author of
several sutras, including the Hatthipadopanna Sutta—the Sutra on the Elephant’s
Footprints—in which he spoke about the relation of the four elements to the five
aggregates in an original way, based on the fruits of his own practice.
   When the Buddha entered the Dharma hall, all the bhikkhus rose to their feet.
He motioned for them to be seated again and then sat down himself. He
motioned to Venerable Sariputta to sit on a low chair placed next to him. The
Buddha spoke to Sariputta, “A bhikkhu has accused you of knocking him down
and not apologizing. Do you have anything to say about this?”
   Venerable Sariputta stood and joined his palms. He bowed first to the Buddha
and then to the community. He said, “Lord, a monk who does not practice, who
does not contemplate the body in the body, who is not mindful of the actions of
the body, such a monk could knock down a fellow monk and leave him there
without apologizing.
   “Lord, I still remember the lesson you gave fourteen years ago to Bhikkhu
Rahula. He was only eighteen years old at the time. You taught him to
contemplate the nature of earth, water, fire, and air in order to nourish and
develop the four virtues of loving kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity.
Although your teaching was directed at Rahula, I learned from it also. I have
made efforts to observe that teaching throughout the past fourteen years and I
have often thanked you inwardly.
   “Lord, I have practiced to be more like earth. Earth is wide and open, and has
the capacity to receive and transform. Whether people toss pure and fragrant
substances such as flowers, perfume, or fresh milk upon the earth, or toss
unclean and foul-smelling substances such as excrement, urine, blood, mucus,
and spit upon it, the earth receives it all equally with neither grasping nor
aversion.
   “Lord, I have contemplated to make my mind and body more like the earth. A
monk who does not contemplate the body in the body, who is not mindful of the
actions of the body, such a monk could knock down a brother monk and leave
him without apologizing. Such is not my way.
   “Lord, I have practiced to be more like water. Whether someone pours


fragrant substances or defiled substances into water, the water receives them
both without grasping or aversion. Water is immense and flowing and has the
capacity to transform and purify. Respected Buddha, I have contemplated to
make my body and mind more like water. A monk who does not contemplate the
body in the body, who is not mindful of the actions of the body, such a monk
could knock down a brother monk and leave him without apologizing. Such is
not my way.
   “Lord, I have practiced to be more like fire. Fire burns all things, the beautiful
as well as the impure, without grasping or aversion. Fire has the ability to burn,
purify, and transform. Respected Buddha, I have contemplated to make my body
and mind more like fire. A monk who does not contemplate the body in the
body, who is not mindful of the actions of the body, such a monk could knock
down a brother monk and leave him without apologizing. Such is not my way.
   “Lord, I have practiced to be more like air. The air carries all manner of
smells, good and bad, without grasping or aversion. Air has the capacity to
transform, purify, and release. Respected Buddha, I have contemplated to make
my body and mind become more like the air. A monk who does not contemplate
the body in the body, who is not mindful of the actions of the body, such a monk
could knock down a brother monk and leave him without apologizing. Such is
not my way.
   “Lord, like a small untouchable child with tattered clothes who clasps a bowl
and begs in the street for scraps of food, I practice to hold no false pride or
arrogance. I have tried to make my heart like the heart of an untouchable child’s
heart. I have tried to practice humility, not daring to place myself higher than
others. Respected Buddha, a monk who does not contemplate the body in the
body, who is not mindful of the actions of the body, such a monk could knock
down a brother monk and leave him without apologizing. Such is not my way.”
   Venerable Sariputta was prepared to continue speaking, but his accuser could
bear no more. He stood up and draped a corner of his sanghati robe over his
shoulder, and then bowed to the Buddha. With his palms joined, he confessed,
“Lord Buddha, I have violated the precepts. I have born false witness against
Venerable Sariputta. I confess my transgression before you and the entire
community. I vow to observe my precepts in the future.”
   The Buddha said, “It is good that you have confessed your transgression
before the community. We accept your confession.”
   Venerable Sariputta joined his palms and said, “I bear no grudge against my
brother, and I ask him to forgive anything I may have done to upset him in the


past.”
   The bhikkhu bowed to Sariputta with his palms joined. Sariputta returned his
bow. Happiness filled the Dharma hall. Venerable Ananda stood up and said,
“Brother Sariputta, please stay with us for a few more days. Your brothers would
welcome a chance to spend more time with you.”
   Venerable Sariputta smiled his acceptance.
   With the retreat season over, the Buddha traveled to many villages in the
countryside. One day he spoke in Kesaputta, a village which belonged to the
Kalama clan. Many young people gathered to hear him. They had all heard about
the Monk Gautama but this was the first opportunity they had to meet him in
person.
   One young man joined his palms and spoke, “Teacher, for a long time, many
brahmana priests have come to Kesaputta in order to teach their various
doctrines. Each priest claims that his doctrine is superior to others’ doctrines.
This has confused us. We do not know which path to follow. In fact, we have lost
faith in all the doctrines. We have heard that you are an enlightened Master. Can
you tell us whom we should believe and whom we should not? Who speaks the
truth and who is merely spreading false doctrines?”
   The Buddha answered, “I can understand why you have given rise to doubts.
Friends, do not be hasty to believe a thing even if everyone repeats it, or even if
it is written in holy scripture or spoken by a teacher revered by the people.
Accept only those things which accord with your own reason, things which the
wise and virtuous support, things which in practice bring benefit and happiness.
Abandon those things which do not accord with your own reason, which are not
supported by the wise and virtuous, and which in practice do not bring benefit
and happiness.”
   The Kalamas asked the Buddha to tell them more. He said, “Friends, suppose
there is a person ruled by greed, anger, and ignorance. Will his greed, anger, and
ignorance bring him happiness or suffering?”
   The people answered, “Master, greed, anger, and ignorance will cause such a
person to commit acts that bring suffering to himself and others.”
   “Is living by greed, anger, and ignorance supported by the wise and virtuous?”
   “No, Master.”
   The Buddha continued, “Take the example of someone who lives according to
loving kindness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and equanimity, who makes
others happy by relieving their suffering, who rejoices over the good fortune of
others, and who treats others without discrimination. Will such qualities bring


that person happiness or suffering?”
   “Teacher, such qualities will bring happiness to the person and to all those
around him.”
   “Are loving kindness, compassion, joy, and equanimity supported and
encouraged by the wise and virtuous?”
   “Yes, Master.”
   “My friends, you are already qualified to discern which things to accept and
which things to discard. Believe and accept only those things which accord with
your own reason, those things which are supported by the wise and virtuous, and
those things which in practice bring benefit and happiness to yourselves and
others. Discard things which oppose these principles.”
   The Kalama youth were encouraged by the Buddha’s words. They saw that his
teaching did not require unconditional faith. The Buddha’s way truly respected
freedom of thought. Many of the Kalamas asked to be accepted by the Buddha
as disciples that day.


                           Chapter Sixty-Three
                            All the Way to the Sea
During his travels, the Buddha stopped in the village of Alavi. The Buddha and
eight bhikkhus were offered a meal in a public building there, while all the local
people were served food as well. Following the meal, the Buddha was about to
begin a Dharma talk, when an elderly farmer, almost out of breath, entered the
hall. He was late because he’d had to search for a lost water buffalo. The Buddha
could see that the old farmer had not eaten all day, and he asked that rice and
curry be served to the old man before he would begin the Dharma talk. Many
people felt impatient. They did not understand why one man should be allowed
to hold up the Buddha’s discourse.
   When the farmer was finished eating, the Buddha said, “Respected Friends, if
I delivered a Dharma talk while our brother was still hungry, he would not be
able to concentrate. That would be a pity. There is no greater suffering than
hunger. Hunger wastes our bodies and destroys our well-being, peace, and joy.
We should never forget those who are hungry. It is a discomfort to miss one
meal, but think of the suffering of those who have not had a proper meal in days
or even weeks. We must find ways to assure that no one in this world is forced to
go hungry.”
   After Alavi, the Buddha followed the Ganga northwest towards Kosambi. He
paused to watch a piece of driftwood being carried downstream. He called to the
other bhikkhus, pointed to the piece of wood, and said, “Bhikkhus! If that piece
of driftwood does not become lodged against the riverbank, if it does not sink, if
it does not become moored on a sandbar, if it isn’t lifted out of the water, if it
isn’t caught in a whirlpool, or rot from the inside out, it will float all the way to
the sea. It is the same for you on the path. If you don’t become lodged against
the riverbank, if you don’t sink, if you don’t become moored on a sandbar, if you
are not lifted out of the water, if you do not become caught in a whirlpool, or rot
from the inside out, you are certain to reach the great sea of enlightenment and
emancipation.”
   The bhikkhus said, “Please, Lord, explain this more fully. What does it mean
to become lodged against the riverbank, to sink, or to be moored on a sandbar?”


   The Buddha answered, “To become lodged against the riverbank is to become
entangled by the six senses and their objects. If you practice diligently, you will
not become entangled in feelings which result from contact between the senses
and their objects. To sink means to become enslaved by desire and greed, which
rob you of the strength needed to persevere in your practice. To become moored
on a sandbar means to worry about serving only your own desires, forever
seeking advantages and prestige for yourself while forgetting the goal of
enlightenment. To be lifted from the water means to lose yourself in dispersion,
loitering with people of poor character instead of pursuing the practice. To be
caught in a whirlpool means to be bound by the five categories of desire—being
caught by good food, sex, money, fame, or sleep. To rot from the inside out
means to live a life of false virtue, deceiving the sangha while using the Dharma
to serve your own desires.
   “Bhikkhus, if you practice diligently and avoid these six traps, you will
certainly attain the fruit of enlightenment, just as that piece of driftwood will
make it to the sea if it overcomes all obstacles.”
   As the Buddha spoke these words to the bhikkhus, a youth tending water
buffaloes nearby stopped to listen. His name was Nanda. He was so moved by
the Buddha’s words, that he approached the bhikkhus and asked to be accepted
as a disciple. He said, “Teacher, I want to be a bhikkhu like these brothers. I
want to follow the spiritual path. I promise to devote myself to studying the Way.
I will avoid becoming caught against the riverbank, sinking, becoming moored
on a sandbar, being lifted from the water, becoming caught in a whirlpool, and
rotting from the inside out. Please accept me as a disciple.”
   The Buddha was pleased by the young man’s bright countenance. He knew
the young man was capable and diligent, although he had probably had little or
no schooling. The Buddha nodded his acceptance and asked, “How old are
you?”
   Nanda answered, “Master, I am sixteen.”
   “Are your parents living?”
   “No, Master, they are both dead. I have no other family. I take care of a rich
man’s water buffaloes in exchange for shelter.”
   The Buddha asked, “Can you live on just one meal a day?”
   “I have been doing that already for a long time.”
   The Buddha said, “In principle, you should be twenty years old before being
accepted into the sangha. Most young men are not mature enough to live the life
of a homeless monk until they are at least twenty. But you are clearly special. I


will ask the community to waive the usual requirement in your case. You can
practice as a samanera novice for four years before taking the full precepts.
Return the water buffaloes and ask your master’s permission to leave his
employment. We will wait here for you.”
   The youth replied, “Master, I do not think that will be necessary. These
buffaloes are very obedient. They will return to the stable on their own even
without my assistance.”
   The Buddha said, “No, you must lead them back yourself and speak to your
master before you can join us.”
   “But what if you are gone by the time I return?”
   The Buddha smiled. “Do not worry. You have my word that we will wait here
for you.”
   While Nanda led the buffaloes back to their stable, the Buddha spoke with
Svasti. “Svasti, I will place this young man under your care. I believe you
understand best how to guide and support him.”
   Svasti joined his palms and smiled. Venerable Svasti was thirty-nine years old
now. He knew why the Buddha wanted him to be young Nanda’s instructor.
Long ago, the Buddha delivered the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes, after
being inspired by his friendship with Svasti when Svasti was a buffalo boy like
Nanda. Svasti knew he could guide Nanda well on the path. He knew that his
closest friend, Venerable Rahula, would assist him also. Rahula was now thirty-
six.
   Svasti’s siblings were all grown with families of their own. The hut they once
shared had long since perished. Svasti recalled with a smile the visit he made to
Uruvela one year with Rahula. It was after Rupak had married and moved to
another village. At that time Bhima and Bala still lived together and supported
themselves by making and selling cakes. Bhikkhus Svasti and Rahula walked to
the Neranjara River. Svasti had not forgotten his promise to give Rahula the
experience of riding on a water buffalo, and so he called to some young buffalo
boys who were grazing their buffaloes near the riverbanks. He asked them to
help Bhikkhu Rahula climb onto the back of one of the great beasts. At first
Rahula hesitated, but then he removed his sanghati and handed it to Svasti.
Rahula was touched by how gentle the mighty beast was. He shared his
impressions of the leisurely ride with Svasti, and he wondered aloud what the
Buddha would think if he could see him. Svasti smiled. He knew that if Rahula
had remained in the Sakya palace to one day become king, he would never have
enjoyed this water buffalo ride.


   Svasti returned to the present moment just as young Nanda arrived. That night
he shaved Nanda’s hair and showed him how to wear the robe, carry the begging
bowl, walk, stand, lie down, and sit as a mindful bhikkhu. Nanda was mature
and diligent, and Svasti enjoyed helping him.
   Bhikkhu Rahula handed his robe to Svasti, so that he could ride on the back of
the water buffalo.
   He recalled how some years ago, seventeen young people had been accepted
into the sangha at Bamboo Forest. The oldest boy, Upali, was seventeen and the
youngest only twelve. They were all from wealthy families. When Upali asked
his parents to allow him to become a bhikkhu and they agreed, sixteen of his
friends implored their parents to let them do the same. Once they joined the


sangha, they were expected to follow the life of a bhikkhu, including eating only
one meal before noon. The first night, several of the youngest boys cried from
hunger. When the Buddha asked the next morning why he heard children crying
in the night, he was told about the boys being accepted into the community. The
Buddha said, “Henceforth, we will accept only young men who are at least
twenty years of age into the sangha. Children cannot be expected to live the life
of a homeless monk.”
   The boys were allowed to stay, but the Buddha asked that those fifteen years
old and younger be given an additional meal in the evening. All the boys
remained bhikkhus. The youngest one, Svasti realized, was already twenty now.


                            Chapter Sixty-Four
                       The Round of Birth and Death
One day while sitting in Bhesakala Park in Sumsumaragiri, the Buddha spoke to
the bhikkhus, “Bhikkhus, I want to tell you about the Eight Realizations of Great
Beings. Venerable Anuruddha has spoken about these eight realizations before.
They are the realizations taught by Great Beings to help others overcome
forgetfulness and attain enlightenment.
   “The first realization is the awareness that all dharmas are impermanent and
without a separate self. By contemplating on the impermanent and non-self
nature of all dharmas, you can escape suffering and attain enlightenment, peace,
and joy.
   “The second realization is the awareness that more desire brings more
suffering. All hardships in life arise from greed and desire.”
   “The third realization is the awareness that living simply, having few desires,
leads to peace, joy, and serenity. Living simply allows for more time and
concentration to practice the Way and to help others.
   “The fourth realization is the awareness that only diligent effort leads to
enlightenment. Laziness and indulging in sensual desires are obstacles to the
practice.
   “The fifth realization is the awareness that ignorance is the cause of the
endless round of birth and death. You must always remember to listen and learn
in order to develop your understanding and eloquence.
   “The sixth realization is the awareness that poverty creates hatred and anger,
which in turn create a vicious cycle of negative thoughts and actions. Followers
of the Way, when practicing generosity, should consider everyone, friends and
enemies alike, as equal, not condemning anyone’s past wrongdoings or hating
those who are presently causing harm.
   “The seventh realization is the awareness that although we dwell in the world
to teach and assist others, we should not become caught up in worldly matters.
One who leaves home to follow the Way possesses only three robes and a bowl.
He always lives simply and looks at all beings with the eyes of compassion.
   “The eighth realization is the awareness that we do not practice for our


individual enlightenment alone, but devote our whole being to guiding all others
to the gates of enlightenment.
   “Bhikkhus, these are the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings. All Great
Beings, thanks to these eight realizations, have attained enlightenment.
Wherever they go in life, they use these eight realizations to open minds and
educate others, so that everyone may discover the path that leads to
enlightenment and emancipation.”
   When he returned to Bamboo Forest in Rajagaha, the Buddha was informed
that Bhikkhu Vakkali was gravely ill and hoped to see the Buddha before he
died. Vakkali’s attendant came to see the Buddha. After bowing three times, he
said, “Lord, my teacher is very ill. He is staying in the home of a lay disciple
who is a potter. He asked me to come bow before you in his place.”
   The Buddha turned to Ananda and said, “We will go at once to visit Venerable
Vakkali.”
   When he saw the Buddha enter the room, Bhikkhu Vakkali made a great effort
to sit up.
   “Please, Vakkali,” said the Buddha, “don’t try to sit up. Ananda and I will sit
close by the bed on these chairs.”
   After he and Ananda were seated, the Buddha said, “Vakkali, I hope your
strength is improving and that the pains in your body are easing.”
   “Lord, my strength is rapidly declining. I am most uncomfortable. The pains
are growing more severe.”
   “I hope then that you do not suffer from any worries or regrets.”
   “Lord, I do suffer from worries and regrets.”
   “I hope your regrets are not about violating your precepts.”
   “No, Lord, I have observed my precepts fully and feel no shame.”
   “What then do you worry about and regret?”
   “I regret that, due to my illness, it has been a long time since I have been able
to visit you.”
   The Buddha gently scolded, “Vakkali, do not worry about such things. You
have lived a blameless life. That is what keeps teacher and student close. Do you
think you need to see my face in order to see the Buddha? This body is not
important. Only the teaching is important. If you can see the teaching, you can
see the Buddha. If you can see this body but not the teaching, it is of no value at
all.”
   After a moment of silence, the Buddha asked, “Vakkali, do you understand
how impermanent the body is, mine as well as yours?”


   “Lord, I see that most clearly. The body is constantly being born, dying, and
transforming. I see how feelings are also impermanent, constantly being born,
dying, and transforming. Perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness
follow the same law of birth and death. All are impermanent. Before your visit
today, I contemplated deeply on the impermanent nature of the five skandhas. I
have seen that there is nothing in the five rivers of form, feelings, perceptions,
mental formations, or consciousness that contains a separate self.”
   “Wonderful, Vakkali! I have faith in you. Nothing in the five skandhas
contains a separate self. Open your eyes and look. Where is Vakkali not present?
What is not Vakkali? The wonder of life is everywhere. Vakkali, birth and death
cannot touch you. Smile at your body comprised of the four elements. Smile
even at the pain rising and falling in your body.”
   Tears glistened in Vakkali’s eyes and he smiled. The Buddha stood up and
took his leave. When the Buddha and Ananda were gone, Vakkali asked his
friends to carry him on his bed to Isigili mountain. He said, “How can someone
like me die in a room? I want to die on the mountainside beneath the spacious
skies.”
   His friends carried him to Isigili. That night the Buddha meditated deep into
the night. In the early hours of the morning, he told a number of bhikkhus he met
near his hut, “Go visit Vakkali and tell him there is nothing to fear. His death will
be peaceful and blameless. Tell him to put his heart at rest. I have great faith in
him.”
   When the bhikkhus found Venerable Vakkali at Isigili, they told him they
carried a message from the Buddha. Vakkali said, “Please, friends, lift me off
this bed and place me on the earth. How can I lie on a high bed while receiving
the Lord Buddha’s words?”
   They did as he asked and then repeated the Buddha’s words. Vakkali joined
his palms and said, “Please, brothers, when you return to the monastery, bow
three times to the Buddha on my behalf and tell him that Bhikkhu Vakkali is
deathly ill and in terrible pain. Vakkali sees clearly that the five skandhas are
impermanent and without a separate self. Vakkali is no longer bound by the five
skandhas. In his last moments, Vakkali has released all fears and worries.”
   The bhikkhus said, “Brother, ease your heart. We will return and bow three
times to the Buddha and speak your last words to him.”
   The bhikkhus were no sooner out of sight than Bhikkhu Vakkali passed away.
   That afternoon the Buddha climbed Isigili with several bhikkhus. The blue sky
was cloudless. Only a thin strand of smoke curled up into the sky from a hut at


the foot of the mountain. It drifted for a moment and then vanished. Looking at
the vast round sky, the Buddha said, “Vakkali has been liberated. No delusion or
phantom can disturb him now.”
   The Buddha again traveled, this time to Nalanda and Vesali. One day, at the
Kutagara monastery in the Great Woods, the Buddha told the bhikkhus, “As
living beings, people have to suffer, more or less. However, those who devote
themselves to the study and practice of the Dharma suffer much less than others,
because they possess understanding, the fruit of their practice.”
   That day it was still very hot, but the Buddha was seated with his bhikkhus in
the shade of many beautiful sala trees. He picked up a small piece of earth, held
it between his thumb and forefinger, and asked, “Bhikkhus, if we compare this
piece of earth with Gayasisa mountain, which is larger?”
   “Of course, Gayasisa is much larger, Lord.”
   “It is like that, 0 Bhikkhus. For those who have arrived at Understanding
thanks to their study and practice of the Dharma, their suffering is almost
nothing compared with the suffering of those who are submerged in ignorance.
Ignorance magnifies suffering by millions of times.
   “Bhikkhus, suppose someone is struck by an arrow. He will feel pain. But if a
second arrow strikes him at the very same spot, the pain will be much more than
just doubled. And if a third arrow strikes him at that same spot again, the pain
will be a thousand times more intense. Bhikkhus, ignorance is the second and the
third arrow. It intensifies the pain.
   “Thanks to understanding, a practitioner can prevent the pain in himself and
others from being intensified. When an unpleasant feeling, physical or mental,
arises in him, the wise man does not worry, complain, weep, pound his chest,
pull his hair, torture his body and mind, or faint. He calmly observes his feeling
and is aware that it is only a feeling. He knows that he is not the feeling, and he
is not caught by the feeling. Therefore, the pain cannot bind him. When he has a
painful physical feeling, he knows that there is a painful physical feeling. He
does not lose his calmness, does not worry, does not fear, and does not complain.
Thus the feeling remains a painful physical feeling, and it is not able to grow and
ravage his whole being.
   “Bhikkhus, be diligent in your practice of looking deeply so that the fruit of
Understanding may arise and you will no longer be bound by pain. Birth,
sickness, old age, and death will also stop bothering you.
   “When a bhikkhu is about to pass away, he should dwell in the contemplation
of the body, the feelings, the mind, and the objects of mind. Every position and


every act of the body should be placed under mindfulness. Every feeling should
also be placed under mindfulness. The bhikkhu contemplates the nature of
impermanence and the nature of interdependence of the body and of the feelings,
so that he will not be bound by the body and the feelings, even pleasant ones.
   “If he needs all his strength to bear the pain, he should only observe, ‘This is a
kind of pain that needs all my strength to bear. This pain is not me. I am not this
pain. I am not caught by this pain. The body and the feelings are, at this moment,
like a lamp whose oil and wick are running out. It is by conditions that the light
manifests or ceases to manifest. I am not bound by conditions.’ If a monk
practices in this way, calmness and release will come.”
   When the first rains began to relieve the summer heat, he returned to Jetavana
for the retreat season. He taught the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis more about the law
of dependent co-arising. One bhikkhu stood up and asked, “Lord, you have
taught that consciousness is the basis of name and form. Does it then follow that
the existence of all dharmas arises from consciousness?”
   The Buddha answered, “That is correct. Form is an object of consciousness.
The subject and the object of consciousness are two faces of one reality. There
can be no consciousness without the object of consciousness. Consciousness and
the object of consciousness cannot exist independently of each other. Because
the subject and object of consciousness cannot be separated, they are both said to
arise from mind.”
   “Lord, if form arises from consciousness, consciousness can be said to be the
source of the universe. Is it possible to know how consciousness or mind came
to be? When did mind begin? Can one speak of the beginning of mind?”
   “Bhikkhus, the concepts of beginning and end are only mental constructs
created by the mind. In truth, there is no beginning or end. We only think about
beginnings and endings when we are trapped in ignorance. It is because of
ignorance that people are caught in an endless round of birth and death.”
   “If the round of birth and death has no beginning and no end, how can one
escape it?”
   “Birth and death are only concepts created out of ignorance. To transcend the
thoughts of birth-and-death and beginning-and-end is to transcend the endless
round. Bhikkhus, that is all I wish to say today. Practice looking deeply into all
things. We will speak again about this subject another day.”


                              Chapter Sixty-Five
                             Neither Full nor Empty
After the Dharma talk, Venerable Svasti noticed how pensive many of the monks
looked. He also felt that he had not grasped what the Buddha taught. He resolved
to listen carefully to the elder disciples during their Dharma discussions.
   At the next Dharma talk, Venerable Ananda was asked by the monks to ask
questions to the Buddha in front of the entire assembly. His first question was,
“Lord, what is meant by ‘the world’ and ‘the dharmas’?”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, the world (loka) is the collective whole of all
things subject to change and dissolution. All dharmas are contained in the
eighteen realms: the six sense organs, the six sense objects, and the six sense
consciousnesses. The six sense organs, as you know, are eye-consciousness, ear-
consciousness, nose-consciousness, tongue-consciousness, body-consciousness,
and mind-consciousness. The six sense objects are form, sound, smell, taste,
touch, and objects of mind. The six sense consciousnesses are seeing, hearing,
smelling, tasting, touching, and perceiving. There are no dharmas apart from the
eighteen realms. All eighteen realms are subject to birth and death, to change
and dissolution. That is why I have said that the world is the collective whole of
all things which possess the nature of change and dissolution.”
   Ananda then asked, “Lord, you have often said that all dharmas are empty.
What is meant by that?”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, I have said that all dharmas are empty because all
dharmas are without a separate self. None of the six sense organs, six sense
objects, or six sense consciousnesses, possess a separate, individual self.”
   Ananda said, “Lord, you have said that the Three Gates of Liberation are
emptiness, signlessness, and aimlessness. You have said that all dharmas are
empty. Is it because all dharmas are subject to change and dissolution that they
are also empty?”
   “Ananda, I have spoken often about emptiness and the contemplation on
emptiness. The contemplation on emptiness is a wondrous meditation which can
help people transcend suffering, birth, and death. Today I will speak more on this
contemplation.


   “Ananda, we are all sitting together in the Dharma hall. There are no markets,
buffaloes, or villages inside the Dharma hall. There are only bhikkhus, sitting
and listening to the Dharma. We can say that the hall is empty of all that is not
here, and that it contains what is actually here. The Dharma hall is empty of
markets, buffaloes, and villages, but contains bhikkhus. Do you agree that that is
correct?”
   “Yes, Lord.”
   “After the Dharma talk, we will all leave the Dharma hall and there will no
longer be any bhikkhus here. At that moment, the Dharma hall will be empty of
markets, buffaloes, villages, and bhikkhus. Do you agree that that is so?”
   “Yes, Lord, at that moment the Dharma hall will be empty of all those things.”
   “Ananda, full always means full of something, and empty always means
empty of something. The words full and empty have no meaning on their own.”
   “Please, Lord, could you explain that more.”
   “Consider this—empty is always empty of something, such as empty of
markets, buffaloes, villages, and bhikkhus. We cannot say that emptiness is
something which exists independently. Fullness is the same. Full is always full
of something, such as full of markets, buffaloes, villages, or bhikkhus. Fullness
is not something which exists independently. At the present moment, we can say
that the Dharma hall is empty of markets, buffaloes, and villages. As for all
dharmas, if we say that all dharmas are full, what are they full of? If we say that
all dharmas are empty, what are they empty of?
   “Bhikkhus, the emptiness of all dharmas refers to the fact that all dharmas are
empty of a permanent and unchanging self. That is the meaning of the emptiness
of all dharmas. You know that all dharmas are subject to change and dissolution.
Because of that, they cannot be said to possess a separate, independent self.
Bhikkhus, empty means empty of self.
   “Bhikkhus, there is no aggregate among the five aggregates that possesses a
permanent, unchanging nature. All the aggregates of body, feelings, perceptions,
mental formations, and consciousness, are without a separate self. They do not
possess a permanent and unchanging nature. A permanent and unchanging
nature would be an essential self. Contemplating in order to see the absence of
such an independent, separate self is contemplating emptiness.”
   Ananda said, “All dharmas are without a self. This we understand. But then,
Lord, do the dharmas actually exist?”
   The Buddha quietly looked down at the small table before him on which was
placed a bowl of water. He pointed to the bowl and asked Ananda, “Ananda,


would you say this bowl is full or empty?”
   “Lord, the bowl is full of water.”
   “Ananda, take this bowl outside and empty all the water out of it.”
   Venerable Ananda did as the Buddha instructed. When he returned, he placed
the empty bowl back on the table. The Buddha lifted the bowl and turned it
upside down. He asked, “Ananda, is this bowl now full or empty.”
   “Lord, it is no longer full. It is empty.”
   “Ananda, are you sure the bowl is empty?”
   “Yes, Lord, I am sure the bowl is empty.”
   “Ananda, this bowl is no longer full of water, but it is full of air. You have
forgotten already! Empty means empty of something and full means full of
something. In this case, the bowl is empty of water but full of air.”
   “I understand now.”
   “Good. Ananda, this bowl can be either empty or full. Of course, whether
there is emptiness or fullness depends on the presence of the bowl. Without a
bowl, there would be no emptiness or fullness. It is just like the Dharma hall. In
order for it to be full or empty, it must first be there.”
   “Ah!” the bhikkhus suddenly exclaimed with one voice.
   Venerable Ananda joined his palms. “Lord, then the dharmas do exist. The
dharmas are real.”
   The Buddha smiled. “Ananda, don’t be caught by words. If the dharmas are
phenomena empty of self, their existence is not the existence of ordinary
perception. Their existence has the same meaning as ‘emptiness.’”
   Ananda joined his palms. “Please, Lord, can you explain that further.”
   “Ananda, we have spoken about an empty and a full bowl. We have also
spoken about an empty and a full Dharma hall. I have briefly spoken about
emptiness. Let me speak more about fullness.
   “Although we have agreed that the bowl on the table is empty of water, if we
look deeply, we will see that is not entirely true.”
   The Buddha lifted the bowl and then looked at Ananda. “Ananda, among the
interwoven elements that have given rise to the bowl, do you see water?”
   “Yes, Lord. Without water, the potter would not have been able to mix the clay
he used to fashion the bowl.”
   “Just so, Ananda. Looking deeply, we can see the presence of water in the
bowl, even though we earlier stated that it is empty of water. The presence of the
bowl depends on the presence of water. Ananda, can you see the fire element in
this bowl?”


   “Yes, Lord. Fire was necessary to complete the bowl. Looking deeply, I can
see the presence of heat and fire in the bowl.”
   “What else can you see?”
   “I see the air. Without air, the fire could not have burned and the potter could
not have lived. I see the potter and his skillful hands. I see his consciousness. I
see the kiln and the wood stacked in the kiln. I see the trees the wood came from.
I see the rain, sun, and earth which enabled the trees to grow. Lord, I can see
thousands of interpenetrating elements which gave rise to this bowl.”
   “Excellent, Ananda! Contemplating the bowl, it is possible to see the
interdependent elements which gave rise to the bowl. Ananda, these elements are
present within and without the bowl. Your own awareness is one of the elements.
If you took away heat and returned it to the sun, if you returned the clay to the
earth and the water to the river, if you returned the potter to his parents and the
wood to the forest trees, could the bowl still exist?”
   “Lord, the bowl could no longer exist. If you returned the interdependent
elements which gave rise to the bowl to their sources, the bowl could no longer
be present.”
   “Ananda, contemplating the law of dependent co-arising, we see that the bowl
cannot exist independently. It can only exist in interdependent relation with all
other dharmas. All dharmas depend on each other for birth, existence, and death.
The presence of one dharma implies the presence of all other dharmas. The
presence of all dharmas is implied by the presence of just one dharma. Ananda,
this is the principle of interpenetration and interbeing.
   “Ananda, interpenetration means that within this, that is, and within that, this
is. For example, when we look at this bowl we can see the potter, and when we
look at the potter we can see the bowl. Interbeing means that ‘this is that’ and
‘that is this.’ For example, waves are water, and water is waves. Ananda, at
present there are no markets, buffaloes, or villages in the Dharma hall. But that is
only from one viewpoint. In reality, without the presence of markets, buffaloes,
and villages, this Dharma hall could not exist. Thus, Ananda, when you look at
the empty Dharma hall, you should be able to see the presence of markets,
buffaloes, and villages. Without this, that is not. The basic meaning of emptiness
(sunnata) is ‘this is because that is.’”
   The bhikkhus listened in perfect silence. The Buddha’s words made a deep
impression on them. After a brief pause, the Buddha lifted the empty bowl again
and said, “Bhikkhus, this bowl cannot exist independently. It is here thanks to all
the things we consider non-bowl entities such as earth, water, fire, air, potter, and


so forth. It is the same for all dharmas. Every dharma exists in interdependent
relation to all other dharmas. All dharmas exist by the principles of
interpenetration and interbeing.
   “Bhikkhus, look deeply at this bowl, and you can see the entire universe. This
bowl contains the entire universe. There is only one thing the bowl is empty of
and that is a separate, individual self. What is a separate, individual self? It is a
self which exists completely on its own, independent of all other elements. No
dharma can exist independently from other dharmas. No dharma possesses a
separate, essential self. That is the meaning of emptiness. Empty means empty of
self.
   “Bhikkhus, the five aggregates are the basic elements of a person. Form does
not contain a self, because form cannot exist independently. Within form exist
feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness. It is the same for
feelings. Feelings do not possess a self because feelings cannot exist
independently. Within feelings are form, perceptions, mental formations, and
consciousness. The same is true for the other three aggregates. No aggregate
possesses a separate identity. The five aggregates depend on each other in order
to exist. Thus the five aggregates are all empty.
   “Bhikkhus, the six sense organs, the six sense objects, and the six sense
consciousnesses are all empty. Every sense organ, every sense object, and every
sense consciousness depends on all other sense organs, sense objects, and sense
consciousnesses in order to exist. No sense organ, sense object, or sense
consciousness possesses an independent, separate nature.
   “Bhikkhus, let me repeat this so that it will be easy for you to remember. This
is, therefore that is. All dharmas depend on each other in order to exist. Thus all
dharmas are empty. Empty here means empty of an independent, separate self.”
   Venerable Ananda said, “Lord, some brahmana scholars and leaders of other
religious sects claim that the Monk Gautama teaches annihilism. They say that
you lead people to negate all of life. Do they misunderstand you because you say
that all dharmas are empty?”
   The Buddha answered, “Ananda, the brahmana scholars and leaders of other
religious sects do not speak correctly about this. I have never taught the doctrine
of annihilism. I have never led others to deny life. Ananda, among false views
there are two which entangle people the most—views of being and views of non-
being. The first view regards all things as having a separate and permanent self-
nature. The second regards all things as illusions. If you are caught in either
view, you cannot see the truth.


   “Ananda, once Bhikkhu Kaccayana asked me, ‘Lord, what is false view and
what is right view?’ I answered that false view is to be caught in either the notion
of being or the notion of non-being. When we see into the true nature of reality,
we are no longer bound by either of these views. A person with right view
understands the process of birth and death in all dharmas. Because of that, he is
not disturbed by thoughts of existence or non-existence. When suffering arises,
the person with right view knows that suffering is arising. When suffering fades,
the person with right view knows that suffering is fading. The arising and fading
of all dharmas does not disturb the person with right view. The two false views
of permanence and illusion are too extreme. Dependent co-arising transcends
both extremes and dwells in the middle.
   “Ananda, being and non-being are concepts which do not accord with reality.
Reality transcends the boundaries of such concepts. An enlightened person is
one who has transcended the concepts of being and non-being.
   “Ananda, not only are being and non-being empty, but birth and death are also
empty. They are also merely concepts.”
   Venerable Ananda asked, “Lord, if birth and death are empty, why have you
often said that all dharmas are impermanent, constantly being born and dying?”
   “Ananda, at the relative, conceptual level, we speak of dharmas being born
and passing away. But from the point of view of the absolute, all dharmas are by
nature birthless and deathless.”
   “Please, Lord, explain this.”
   “Ananda, take the example of the bodhi tree you planted in front of the
Dharma hall. When was it born?”
   “Lord, it was born four years ago at the very moment the seed put forth roots.”
   “Ananda! Before that did the bodhi tree exist?”
   “No, Lord, before that there was no bodhi tree.”
   “Do you mean to say that the bodhi tree arose from nothing? Can any dharma
come into being from nothing?”
   Venerable Ananda fell silent.
   The Buddha continued, “Ananda, there is no dharma in all the universe which
can come into being from nothing. Without the seed there could be no bodhi tree.
The bodhi tree owes its existence to the seed. The tree is the continuation of the
seed. Before the seed penetrated roots into the earth, the bodhi tree was already
present in the seed. If a dharma is already present, how can it be born? The bodhi
tree’s nature is without birth.”
   The Buddha asked Ananda, “After the seed penetrated roots into the earth, did


the seed die?”
   “Yes, Lord, the seed died in order to give birth to the tree.”
   “Ananda, the seed did not die. To die means to pass from existence to non-
existence. Is there any dharma in all the universe which can pass from existence
to non-existence? A leaf, a mote of dust, a trail of incense smoke—none of these
can pass from existence to non-existence. All these dharmas transform into
different dharmas, that is all. The bodhi seed is the same. The seed did not die. It
transformed into a tree. The seed and the tree are both birthless and deathless.
Ananda, the seed and the tree, you, me, the bhikkhus, the Dharma hall, the leaf, a
dust mote, a trail of incense smoke—all are without birth and death.
   “Ananda, all dharmas are without birth and death. Birth and death are only
mental concepts. All dharmas are neither full nor empty, neither created nor
destroyed, neither defiled nor immaculate, neither increasing nor decreasing,
neither coming nor going, neither one nor many. All these are merely concepts.
Thanks to the contemplation on the empty nature of all dharmas, it is possible to
transcend all discriminating concepts in order to realize the true nature of all
things.
   “Ananda, the true nature of all things is that there is neither full nor empty,
birth nor death, becoming nor dissolving. It is based on that true nature that the
world of birth and death, fullness and emptiness, becoming and dissolving arises.
If not, how could there be a way out of birth and death, fullness and emptiness,
becoming and dissolving?
   “Ananda, have you ever stood on the seashore and watched the waves rise and
fall on the surface of the sea? Birthlessness and deathlessness are like the water.
Birth and death are like the waves. Ananda, there are long waves and short
waves, high waves and low waves. Waves rise and fall, but the water remains.
Without water, there could be no waves. The waves return to water. Waves are
water, water is waves. Though the waves may rise and pass away, if they
understand that they themselves are the water, they will transcend notions of
birth and death. They will not worry, fear, or suffer because of birth and death.
   “Bhikkhus, the contemplation on the empty nature of all dharmas is
wondrous. It leads to liberation from all fear, worry, and suffering. It will help
you transcend the world of birth and death. Practice this contemplation with all
your being.”
   The Buddha was finished speaking.
   Venerable Svasti had never heard the Buddha speak more profoundly or
wondrously. The eyes and smiles of the Buddha’s senior disciples radiated


happiness. Svasti felt he understood the Buddha’s words, but had not penetrated
their deepest meaning. He knew that Ananda would repeat the entire Dharma
talk in the coming days. He would then have an opportunity to learn more by
listening to the senior disciples discuss what the Buddha had said.


                             Chapter Sixty-Six
                                Four Mountains
Early one morning, Venerable Moggallana came to the Buddha, his eyes filled
with tears. The Buddha asked him what was the matter, and Moggallana
answered, “Lord, last night during my meditation, my thoughts turned to my
mother. I contemplated on my feelings for her. I know when I was young I
sometimes caused her sorrow, but that is not the source of my pain. My pain
arises from the knowledge that I was unable to help my mother while she was
still alive, nor can I help her in death. Lord, my mother’s karma is heavy. She
committed many crimes during her life, and I am sure that her bad karma
follows her and continues to make her suffer. During my meditation, I saw my
mother, thin as a ghoul, in a dark, foul place. There was a bowl of rice nearby,
and I offered it to her. But when she placed the rice in her mouth, it turned into
live coals, and she had to spit it out in pain. Lord, this image will not leave me. I
don’t know how I can lighten her bad karma and help her to find release.”
   The Buddha asked, “What crimes did she commit when she was alive?”
   Moggallana answered, “Lord, she did not practice respect for life. Her work
required her to kill many creatures. She did not practice right speech. Her words
were often sources of suffering to others. She was like someone who rips up
living trees and plants dead ones in their place. I dare not recount all her
transgressions. It is enough to say that she violated all five of the wonderful
precepts. Lord, I would endure any suffering to reverse my mother’s karma.
Please, Lord, in your compassion, tell me what I might do.”
   The Buddha said, “Moggallana, I am deeply moved by your love for your
mother. The debt of gratitude we owe our parents is as wide as the sky and as
deep as the sea. A child should never forget that debt of gratitude day and night.
In times when there are no Buddhas or holy persons, parents should serve as
Buddhas and holy persons. Moggallana, you did your best to help your mother
while she was still living. Your concern continues now that she has died. This
shows how deep your love is. I am happy to see that.
   “Moggallana, the most important way to offer tribute to one’s parents is by
living a life of happiness and virtue. That is the best way to repay our debt of


gratitude and to fulfill our parents’ aspirations for us. Your life, Moggallana, is
such a life. Your life of peace and joy, happiness and virtue, serves as a model to
others. You have helped many people find the path. Offer your life and good
merit on behalf of your mother and her karma can be transformed.
   “Moggallana, I have a suggestion to help your mother. On Pavarana Day, the
last day of the retreat season, ask the entire community to join you in a
transformation ceremony for your mother to pray and transfer our merits to her.
Many monks in our sangha possess deep concentration and virtue. Their energy
of transformation and their prayers joined with yours will be most powerful.
Thanks to that, your mother’s bad karma will dissolve, and she will have a
chance to enter the path of true Dharma.
   “I am sure there are others in our sangha with similar situations. We should
organize this ceremony on behalf of everyone’s parents. Arrange with Sariputta
to hold a special transformation ceremony on Pavarana Day on behalf of all
parents, those who have died and those who are still living. This will also
provide a good occasion to teach young people about the gratitude we owe our
parents and ancestors.
   “Moggallana, most people only appreciate their parents after they have
already died. Having parents is a great happiness. Parents can be a source of
great joy for their children. Children should cherish their parents while they are
still alive, truly seeing them and finding ways to make them happy. Whether
parents are alive or have passed away, loving actions can bring them happiness
and share good merit with them. Helping the poor and infirm, visiting the lonely,
freeing prisoners, releasing animals destined for the butcher, planting trees, these
are all compassionate actions which can transform the present situation and
bring happiness to our parents. On Pavarana Day, we will encourage everyone to
perform these kinds of acts.”
   Deeply comforted, Moggallana bowed to the Buddha.
   That afternoon after his walking meditation, the Buddha met King Pasenadi at
the monastery gates. As they exchanged greetings, seven ascetics from the
Nigantha sect passed by. Ascetics in their sect wore no clothes, practiced
austerities, did not shave their beards or cut their hair, and did not cut their nails.
The king excused himself from the Buddha and approached the ascetics. He
bowed respectfully and said, “Respected monks of high virtue, I am Pasenadi,
King of Kosala.” He bowed to them two more times, repeating the same words,
before he returned to the Buddha’s side. After they were out of sight, he asked
the Buddha, “Lord, according to you, have any of those ascetics yet attained


Arhatship? Are any of them close to attaining such fruits?”
   The Buddha answered, “Your majesty, you live the life of a ruler and thus are
more accustomed to men of government and politics. It is only natural that you
would find it difficult to ascertain which monks have attained certain levels of
spiritual practice. But in fact, it is difficult for anyone to know whether or not
someone is enlightened after merely meeting them once or twice. It is necessary
to live close to them, observing them carefully to see how they respond to
difficult circumstances, to see how they converse with others, and to understand
the depth of their wisdom, virtue, and attainment.”
   The king understood. He said, “Lord, it is similar to when I send spies to
investigate situations in other places. They disguise themselves so they will not
be recognized. Often when they return to the palace, even I do not recognize
them until they have discarded their disguises and washed their faces. Yes, I see
you are correct. Unless you know someone in depth, you cannot understand the
depth of their virtue, wisdom, and attainment.”
   The Buddha invited the king to walk with him to his hut. When they arrived,
the Buddha asked Ananda to put out chairs.
   The king confided to the Buddha, “Lord, I am now seventy years old. I want
to devote more time to spiritual studies. I feel I should do more sitting and
walking meditation than I have in the past. But Lord, palace affairs are most
time-consuming and demanding. Sometimes when I come to your Dharma talks,
I am so tired I cannot keep my eyes open. I feel so ashamed. Lord, I am also
guilty of overindulgence in food. One day I came to the monastery after eating
entirely too much. It made me sleepy, and I went for a walk in hopes that
walking meditation would clear my mind. But I grew more and more sleepy. I
did not even notice you were standing on the same path, and I bumped right into
you. Do you remember?”
   The Buddha laughed. “Yes, I remember, your Majesty. Majesty, simply eat
less. Doing so will make your mind and body feel lighter, which will improve
your ability to perform both your work of governing and your spiritual practice.
You might ask Queen Mallika or Princess Vajiri to help you by supervising your
daily meals. They could serve you smaller quantities, still paying attention to the
quality of nutrition.”
   The king joined his palms to accept the Buddha’s suggestion.
   The Buddha continued, “It is good to devote more time to looking after your
health and pursuing your spiritual practice. Not much time remains you in this
life. Majesty, suppose a trusted messenger brought you news that a mighty


mountain, high as the sky, was approaching from the East, crushing every living
thing in its path. Just as you begin to worry about this situation, another trusted
messenger brings news that a mighty mountain is advancing from the West, also
crushing everything in its path. Then messengers from the North and South
arrive bearing similar messages. Four mountains are advancing towards the
capital, crushing every being in their paths. You know that you cannot escape.
There is nothing you can do to prevent the mountains from coming. Your time is
short. What would your Majesty do?”
   The king pondered for a moment and then said, “Lord, I believe there is only
one thing I could do. That would be to live my remaining hours in as worthy and
serene a way as possible, following the true teaching.”
   The Buddha praised the king. “Yes, your Majesty! Those four mountains are
the mountains of birth, old age, sickness, and death. Old age and death are
closing in on us, and we can never escape.”
   The king joined his palms. “Lord, remembering that old age and death are
approaching, I understand that the best thing I can do is to live my remaining
days and months according to your teaching, living serenely, mindfully, and
benefiting others, including the future generations.”
   The king stood up and bowed to the Buddha before taking his leave.
   That rainy season, many brahmans and members of different religious sects
gathered in Savatthi. They organized sermons, lectures, and debates throughout
the region, inviting people from the city to attend. At the debates, different sects
were given a chance to expound their doctrines. Several of the Buddha’s lay
disciples attended some of these debates. They told the Buddha and the bhikkhus
what they had seen and heard. They said that every metaphysical problem
imaginable was presented and that every speaker considered his doctrine the
only correct one. The debates began cordially but often ended in angry shouting
matches.
   The Buddha told his disciples the following fable:
   “Once upon a time, a clever king invited several people blind from birth to
visit the palace. He brought out an elephant and asked them to touch it and then
describe what the elephant was like. The blind man who rubbed its legs said that
the elephant was like the pillars of a house. The man who stroked its tail said the
elephant was like a feather duster. The person who touched its ears said it was
like a winnowing basket, and the man who touched its stomach said it was like a
round barrel. The person who rubbed its head said the elephant was like a large
earthenware jar, and the person who touched its tusk said the elephant was like a


stick. When they sat down to discuss what the elephant was like, no one could
agree with anyone else, and a very heated argument arose.
   “Bhikkhus, what you see and hear comprises only a small part of reality. If
you take it to be the whole of reality, you will end up having a distorted picture.
A person on the path must keep a humble, open heart, acknowledging that his
understanding is incomplete. We should devote constant effort to study more
deeply in order to make progress on the path. A follower of the Way must remain
open-minded, understanding that attachment to present views as if they were
absolute truth will only prevent us from realizing the truth. Humility and open-
mindedness are the two conditions necessary for making progress on the path.”


                           Chapter Sixty-Seven
                                   Ocean Poet
At the end of the retreat season, many monks bid farewell to the Buddha and
then took to the road to spread the Dharma. Venerable Punna, one of the
Buddha’s most capable and respected bhikkhus, told the Buddha of his plans to
return to his native region in order to teach the Dharma. He was from the island
Sunaparanta located in the Eastern Sea.
   The Buddha said, “I have heard that your native land is still largely
uncivilized and that many of the people there are known for their fierce nature
and violent conflicts. I’m not sure whether it is a good idea for you to go there to
teach.”
   Venerable Punna responded, “Lord, it is precisely because the people are still
fierce and uncivilized that I wish to go teach there. I can show them the way of
compassion and nonviolence. I believe I will be successful.”
   “Punna, what if they scream and curse at you?”
   “Respected Buddha, that is nothing. At least they won’t be throwing rocks and
garbage at me.”
   “What if they do throw rocks and garbage at you?”
   “Respected Buddha, that would still be nothing. At least they won’t be beating
me with sticks and clubs.”
   “What if they do beat you with sticks and clubs?”
   Venerable Punna laughed. “I would still consider them gentle. After all, they
won’t be killing me.”
   “Punna, what if they do kill you?”
   “I doubt very much that will come to pass, Lord. But if it does, I would
consider dying on behalf of the way of compassion and nonviolence a
meaningful death that may even help demonstrate the teaching. Everyone must
die. I would not regret dying for the Way.”
   The Buddha praised him, “You are wonderful, Punna! You possess the
courage to spread the Dharma in Sunaparanta. Actually, I only asked all these
questions for the benefit of the other bhikkhus standing here. I have no doubts
about your abilities and your practice of nonviolence.”


   Venerable Punna had formerly been a merchant. He and his brother-in-law
traded local products from Sunaparanta with merchants in Savatthi. They
traveled by boat and ox cart. One day while waiting for a shipment of goods to
arrive in Savatthi, Punna met a group of bhikkhus out begging. He was deeply
impressed by their serene demeanor, so he went to Jetavana to hear the Buddha
give a Dharma talk. By the end of the Dharma talk, Punna no longer desired to
be a merchant; he wanted to become a bhikkhu. He gave the rest of his goods
and money to his brother-in-law and was ordained in the Buddha’s sangha. He
made quick progress in his practice and was soon a capable teacher himself. He
traveled throughout Kosala and Magadha spreading the Dharma. All the
bhikkhus were confident he would succeed in his native land.
   The next spring, the Buddha returned east. He stopped in Vesali and Campa.
He followed the river to the sea where he taught along the coast. One day as they
stood at the sea’s edge, Ananda said to him, “Lord, listening to the sound of the
tide and looking out over the waves, I follow my breath and dwell in the present
moment. My mind and body find perfect ease. I find that the ocean renews me.”
The Buddha nodded.
   Another day the bhikkhus stopped to talk with a fisherman. Venerable Ananda
asked him his feelings about the sea. The man was tall and handsome, his skin
bronzed by the sun. He told Ananda, “I love many things about the ocean. First,
the sandy shores gently slope downwards into the water which makes it easier
for us to drag our boats and nets. Second, the ocean stays in the same place. You
always know where to find it. Third, the ocean never holds on to a corpse but
thrusts it back onto the shore. Fourth, all rivers—Ganga, Yamuna, Aciravati,
Sarabhu, Mahi—empty into the ocean and leave their own names behind. The
sea receives them all. Fifth, even though rivers empty into the sea, day and night,
the ocean remains at the same level. Sixth, sea water is always salty. Seventh, the
ocean contains beautiful coral, mother-of-pearl, and precious stones. Eighth, the
ocean gives refuge to thousands of living beings, from enormous creatures that
measure hundreds of feet in length to creatures no bigger than the eye of a
needle or a speck of dust. I think you can see, Venerable, how much I love the
ocean.”
   Ananda looked at the fisherman with admiration. Though he was a simple
fisherman, he spoke like a poet. Ananda turned to the Buddha and said, “How
eloquently this man has praised the sea! He loves it in the way I love the Way of
Enlightenment. May we hear more of your teaching?”
   The Buddha smiled and pointed to some large rocks. He said, “Let’s go sit on


those rocks while I speak to you of the special characteristics of the Way of
Enlightenment.”
   They all followed the Buddha, including the fisherman. When everyone was
seated, the Buddha began, “Our brother fisherman has described eight wonderful
characteristics of the sea. I will now describe eight wonderful characteristics of
the true path. First, the Dharma is not unlike the ocean whose shores slope gently
downwards enabling the fishermen to more easily pull their boats and nets into
the sea. In the teaching, every person can progress from the easy to the difficult,
from the low to the high, from the superficial to the profound. The Dharma is
broad enough to accommodate every temperament. Anyone can enter the path,
whether young or old, educated or unschooled. Every person can find methods
suitable to his or her individual needs.
   “Second, as the ocean stays in the same place, so does the Dharma. The
principles of the teaching never change. The precepts have been clearly
transmitted. The true Dharma dwells wherever people study and practice the
principles and precepts. The Dharma cannot be lost or misplaced.
   “Third, as the ocean never holds onto a corpse, the Dharma does not tolerate
ignorance, laziness, or violation of the precepts. Any person who does not
maintain the practice will find himself eventually thrust from the community.
   “Fourth, as the ocean receives all rivers equally, the Dharma receives persons
from all castes equally. And just as rivers that empty into the sea leave their own
names behind, those who enter the path leave their caste, lineage, and former
positions behind in order to take the name of bhikkhu.
   “Fifth, just as the level of the sea remains constant, the Dharma remains
constant no matter how many or how few people follow it. The Dharma cannot
be measured by numbers.
   “Sixth, as seawater is always salty, the Dharma, though it be revealed in
countless ways and though there be countless methods of practice, has only one
taste. That is the taste of liberation. If the teaching does not lead to liberation, it
is not true teaching.
   “Seventh, as the ocean contains coral, mother-of-pearl, and precious stones,
the Dharma contains sublime and precious teachings like the Four Noble Truths,
the Four Right Efforts, the Five Faculties, the Five Powers, the Seven Factors of
Awakening, and the Noble Eightfold Path.
   “Eighth, as the ocean provides a safe refuge to thousands of living beings,
whether they are as tiny as a grain of sand or several hundred feet in length, the
Dharma provides refuge to all, whether they are unschooled children or Great


Beings like the Bodhisattvas. There are countless students of the Dharma who
have attained the fruits of Stream Enterer, Once Returner, Never Returner, or
Arhat.
   “Like the ocean, the Dharma is a source of inspiration and an immeasurable
treasure.”
   Venerable Ananda joined his palms and looked at the Buddha. He said, “Lord,
you are a spiritual Master, and you are also a poet.”


                            Chapter Sixty-Eight
                             Three Wondrous Gates
After leaving the coast, the Buddha visited Pataliputta and Vesali, and then
headed towards his homeland. Upon reaching the town of Samagama in Sakya,
he learned that Nathaputta, leader of the Nigantha sect, had died and that his
followers had divided into two bitter camps. Each side denounced the other for
false interpretation of doctrine, and each vied for the laity’s support. The people
were dismayed and confused, and did not know which side to follow.
   The novice Cunda, Sariputta’s attendant, explained the Nigantha dispute to
Ananda. He was aware of all the details because he had lived for a time in Pava
where Nathaputta taught. Ananda told the Buddha about the conflict, and then
added in a worried tone of voice, “Lord, I hope there will be no split in the
sangha after you pass away.”
   The Buddha patted Ananda on the shoulder and said, “Ananda, do any of the
bhikkhus presently argue over the contents of the teaching? Do they argue about
the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, the Four Right Efforts, the Five
Faculties, the Five Powers, the Seven Factors of Awakening, or the Noble
Eightfold Path?”
   “No, I have never seen any bhikkhus arguing with each other over the
teaching. But you are still among us. We take refuge in your virtue. We all listen
to you and our studies proceed peacefully. But when you are gone,
disagreements may arise over the precepts, how best to organize the sangha, or
how to spread the teaching. If conflicts erupt, many could grow disheartened and
even lose their faith in the path.”
   The Buddha consoled him. “Don’t worry, Ananda. If arguments and conflicts
arise in the sangha over the contents of the teaching such as the Four
Establishments of Mindfulness, the Four Right Efforts, the Five Faculties, the
Five Powers, the Seven Factors of Awakening, or the Noble Eightfold Path—that
would be cause for worry. Disagreements over small matters concerning the
practice of the precepts, sangha organization, and dissemination of the teaching
are not worth worrying about.”
   Despite the Buddha’s reassurances, Venerable Ananda remained unconvinced.


Only recently he had learned that in Vesali, Venerable Sunakkhata, who had once
been the Buddha’s attendant, had abandoned the sangha out of personal
dissatisfaction. He was organizing lectures at which he denounced the Buddha
and the sangha. He exclaimed that the monk Gautama was no more than an
ordinary man who possessed no special insight. He said that Gautama’s teaching
only spoke about liberating one’s own self and showed no concern for society as
a whole. Sunakkhata was sowing seeds of confusion. Venerable Sariputta was
also aware of the situation and shared Ananda’s concern.
   Ananda knew that seeds of discontent were also being sown in Rajagaha.
Several bhikkhus, under the leadership of Venerable Devadatta, were secretly
trying to organize a new sangha, independent from the Buddha. Several capable
bhikkhus were cooperating with Devadatta, including Venerables Kokalika,
Katamoraka Tissa, Khandadeviputta, and Samuddadatta. Devadatta was one of
the Buddha’s brightest and most capable senior disciples. Brother Sariputta had
often praised him before the people and had treated him as a special friend.
Ananda could not understand why Devadatta had recently grown so jealous of
others, especially the Buddha himself. Ananda knew that no one had disclosed
these things to the Buddha yet. He was afraid he himself would have to be the
one to inform the Buddha of these sad developments before long.
   The next year, the Buddha returned to Savatthi for the rainy season. He
dwelled at Jetavana. There he delivered the Sutra on the Dharma Seal.
   “There is a wonderful teaching which I will speak to you about today. Please
empty your minds of all other thoughts in order to calmly and peacefully hear,
receive, and understand this teaching.
   “Bhikkhus, certain Dharma seals are the signs of true Dharma. There are three
seals which every teaching of mine bears. These are Emptiness, Signlessness,
and Aimlessness. These three characteristics are the three gates which lead to
emancipation. These Dharma seals are also known as the Three Gates of
Emancipation, or the Three Liberation Gates.
   “Bhikkhus, the first seal is Emptiness, sunnata. Emptiness does not mean non-
existence. It means that nothing exists independently. Emptiness means empty of
a separate self. As you know, the belief in being and the belief in non-being are
both incorrect. All dharmas depend on each other for their existence. This is
because that is, this is not because that is not, this is born because that is born,
this dies because that dies. Thus, the nature of emptiness is interdependence.
   “Bhikkhus, practice looking at the interdependent relationships of all dharmas
in order to see how all dharmas are present in each other, how one dharma


contains all other dharmas. Apart from one dharma, no other dharmas can exist.
Contemplate the eighteen realms of the six sense organs, the six sense objects,
and the six sense consciousnesses. Contemplate the five aggregates of body,
feelings, perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness. You will see that no
phenomenon, no aggregate, can exist independently. All depend on each other
for existence. When you see this, you will see into the empty nature of all
dharmas. Once you see the empty nature of all dharmas, you will no longer
chase after or run away from any dharma. You will transcend attachment,
discrimination, and prejudice towards all dharmas. Contemplation on the nature
of emptiness opens the first gate to freedom. Emptiness is the first Liberation
Gate.
   “Bhikkhus, the second seal is Signlessness, animitta. Signlessness means to
transcend the confines of perception and mental discrimination. When people are
unable to see the interdependent and empty nature of all dharmas, they perceive
dharmas as being separate and independent phenomena. This exists apart from
that, this is independent of all other dharmas. Looking at dharmas in such a way
is like taking a sword of mental discrimination and cutting up reality into small
pieces. One is then prevented from seeing the true face of reality. Bhikkhus, all
dharmas depend on each other. This is in that, this fits within that, in the one are
found the all. That is the meaning of the terms interpenetration and interbeing.
This is in that, that is in this, this is that, that is this. Contemplate in this way and
you will see that ordinary perception is full of error. The eyes of perception are
unable to see as clearly and accurately as the eyes of understanding. The eyes of
perception can mistake a rope for a snake. With the illuminating eyes of
understanding, the true form of the rope reveals itself and the image of a snake
disappears.
   “Bhikkhus, all mental concepts such as existence, non-existence, birth, death,
one, many, appearing, disappearing, coming, going, defiled, immaculate,
increasing, and decreasing are created by perception and mental discrimination.
From the view of the unconditioned absolute, the true face of reality cannot be
confined within the prisons of such concepts. Thus all dharmas are said to be
signless. Contemplate in order to dissolve all thoughts about existence, non-
existence, birth, death, one, many, appearing, disappearing, coming, going,
defiled, immaculate, increasing, and decreasing, and you will attain liberation.
Signlessness is the second Liberation Gate.
   “Bhikkhus, the third sign is Aimlessness, appanihita. Aimlessness means not
chasing after anything. Why? Usually people try to avoid one dharma by chasing


after another one. People pursue wealth in order to avoid poverty. The spiritual
seeker rejects birth and death in order to attain liberation. But if all dharmas are
contained within each other, if all dharmas are each other, how can you run away
from one dharma to pursue a different one? Within birth and death lies nirvana,
within nirvana lies birth and death. Nirvana and birth and death are not two
separate realities. If you reject birth and death in order to pursue nirvana, you
have not yet grasped the interdependent nature of all dharmas. You have not yet
grasped the empty and formless nature of all dharmas. Contemplate aimlessness
in order to end once and for all your chasing and running away.
   “Liberation and enlightenment do not exist outside of your own self. We need
only open our eyes to see that we ourselves are the very essence of liberation and
enlightenment. All dharmas, all beings, contain the nature of full enlightenment
within themselves. Don’t look for it outside yourself. If you shine the light of
awareness on your own self, you will realize enlightenment immediately.
Bhikkhus, nothing in the universe exists independently of your own
consciousness, not even nirvana or liberation. Don’t search for them elsewhere.
Remember that the object of consciousness cannot exist independently from
consciousness. Don’t chase after any dharma, including Brahma, nirvana, and
liberation. That is the meaning of aimlessness. You already are what you are
searching for. Aimlessness is a wondrous gate that leads to freedom. It is called
the third Liberation Gate.
   “Bhikkhus, this is the teaching of the Dharma Seals, the teaching of the Three
Gates of Emancipation. The Three Gates of Emancipation are wondrous and
sublime. Devote yourselves wholeheartedly to studying and practicing them. If
you practice according to this teaching, you will surely realize liberation.”
   When the Buddha finished giving this sutra, Venerable Sariputta stood up and
bowed to the Buddha. All the other bhikkhus followed his example in order to
show their deep gratitude to the Buddha. Venerable Sariputta announced to the
community that there would be a special session to study the sutra the following
day. He said that this sutra was immeasurably profound and they must devote
their efforts to study, practice, and understand it. Venerable Svasti saw that this
sutra was related to the Sutra on Emptiness which the Buddha had delivered the
previous year. He saw how the Buddha was guiding his disciples from simple
teachings towards ever more subtle and profound teachings. Svasti looked at the
radiant and happy faces of such disciples as Mahakassapa, Sariputta, Punna, and
Moggallana. Svasti remembered how the previous year they also followed
Sariputta’s example in bowing to the Buddha after he delivered the Sutra on


Emptiness. He saw how deep the bond between Teacher and students was.
   The next afternoon Venerables Yamelu and Tekula visited the Buddha at his
hut. These two bhikkhus were brothers from the brahmana caste. They were
well-known for their expertise in linguistics and ancient literature. When they
recited the scriptures, their voices were clear as bells and as resonant as drums.
They bowed to the Buddha, and he invited them to be seated.
   Venerable Yamelu spoke, “Lord, we would like to speak to you concerning the
question of language as it relates to the dissemination of the teaching. Lord, you
usually deliver your talks in Magadhi, but Magadhi is not the native tongue of
many bhikkhus, and the people in some of the regions where the bhikkus teach
do not understand Magadhi. Thus, they translate the teaching into local dialects.
Before we were ordained, we had the good fortune to study many dialects and
languages. It is our observation that the sublime and subtle nuances of your
teaching have been hampered by being translated into local dialects and idioms.
We would like your permission to render all your teachings into the classical
meter of the Vedic language. If all the bhikkhus studied and taught the teaching
in one language, distortion and error could be avoided.”
   The Buddha was silent for a moment. Then he said, “It would not be
beneficial to follow your suggestion. The Dharma is a living reality. The words
used to transmit it should be the words used daily by the people. I do not want
the teaching to be transmitted in a language that can be understood by only a few
scholars. Yamelu and Tekula, I want all my disciples, both ordained and lay, to
study and practice the Dharma in their native tongues. That way the Dharma will
remain vital and accessible. The Dharma must be applicable to present life, and
compatible with local culture.”
   Understanding the Buddha’s intent, Venerables Yamelu and Tekula bowed to
him and took their leave.


                            Chapter Sixty-Nine
                        Where Will the Buddha Go?
One day during a rainstorm, an ascetic named Uttiya came to visit the Buddha.
Ananda led him into the hut and introduced him to the Buddha. The ascetic was
invited to sit down, and Ananda offered him a towel to dry himself.
   Uttiya asked the Buddha, “Monk Gautama, is the world eternal or will it one
day perish?”
   The Buddha smiled and said, “Ascetic Uttiya, with your consent, I will not
answer that question.”
   Uttiya then asked, “Is the world finite or infinite?”
   “I will not answer that question either.”
   “Well then, are body and spirit one or two?”
   “I will not answer that question either.”
   “After you die, will you continue to exist or not?”
   “This question too, I will not answer.”
   “Or perhaps you hold that after death you will neither continue to exist nor
cease to exist?”
   “Ascetic Uttiya, I will not answer that question either.”
   Uttiya looked confounded. He said, “Monk Gautama, you have refused to
answer every question I’ve asked. What question will you answer?”
   The Buddha replied, “I only answer questions that pertain directly to the
practice of gaining mastery over one’s mind and body in order to overcome all
sorrows and anxieties.”
   “How many people in the world do you think your teaching can save?”
   The Buddha sat silently. Ascetic Uttiya said no more.
   Sensing that the ascetic felt that the Buddha didn’t want to answer him or was
unable to, Ananda took pity on the man and spoke up, “Ascetic Uttiya, perhaps
this example will help you better understand my teacher’s intent. Imagine a king
who dwells in a strongly fortified palace surrounded by a wide moat and wall.
There is only one entrance and exit to the palace which is guarded day and night.
The vigilant guard will only allow persons he knows into the palace. No one else
is granted permission to enter. The guard has furthermore made a careful check


of the palace wall to make sure there are no gaps or cracks big enough for even a
kitten to squeeze through. The king sits on his throne without concern for how
many people enter the palace. He knows the guard will prevent all unwelcome
guests from entering. It is similar for Monk Gautama. He is not concerned with
the number of people who follow his Way. He is only concerned with teaching
the Way which has the capacity to dissolve greed, violence, and delusion, so that
those who follow the Way can realize peace, joy, and liberation. Ask my teacher
questions about how to master the mind and body, and he will surely answer
you.”
   Ascetic Uttiya understood Ananda’s example, but because he was still
entangled in questions of a metaphysical nature, he asked no more. He departed
feeling somewhat unsatisfied with his encounter with the Buddha.
   A few days later, another ascetic, named Vacchagota, came to visit the
Buddha. He asked the Buddha questions of a similar nature. For instance, he
asked, “Monk Gautama, could you please tell me whether or not there is a self?”
   The Buddha sat silently. He did not say a word. After asking several questions
and receiving no reply, Vacchagota stood up and left. After he was gone,
Venerable Ananda asked the Buddha, “Lord, you speak about the non-self in
your Dharma talks. Why wouldn’t you answer Vacchagota’s questions about the
self?”
   The Buddha replied, “Ananda, the teaching on the emptiness of self is meant
to guide our meditation. It is not to be taken as a doctrine. If people take it as a
doctrine, they will become entangled by it. I have often said that the teaching
should be considered as a raft used to cross to the other shore or a finger pointing
to the moon. We should not become caught in the teaching. Ascetic Vacchagota
wanted me to hand him a doctrine, but I do not want him to become trapped by
any doctrine, whether it be a doctrine of the self or the non-self. If I told him
there was a self, that would contradict my teaching. But if I told him there was
no self and he clings to that as a doctrine, it would not benefit him. It is better to
remain silent than to answer such questions. It is better for people to think I do
not know the answers to their questions than for them to become trapped in
narrow views.”
   One day Venerable Anuruddha was stopped by a group of ascetics. They did
not want to let him pass until he answered their question. They asked him, “We
have heard that Monk Gautama is a completely enlightened Master and that his
teaching is subtle and profound. You are his disciple. Therefore, answer this—
when Monk Gautama dies, will he continue to exist or will he cease to exist?”


   The ascetics told Anuruddha that he must select from one of the four
following possibilities:
   When he dies, Monk Gautama will continue to exist.
   When he dies, Monk Gautama will cease to exist.
   When he dies, Monk Gautama will both continue to exist and cease to exist.
   When he dies, Monk Gautama will neither continue to exist nor cease to exist.
   Bhikkhu Anuruddha knew that none of these four responses was compatible
with the true teaching. He remained silent. The ascetics did not want to accept
his silence. They tried in vain to force him to select one of the four responses. At
last, the Venerable said, “My friends, according to my understanding, none of
these four responses can accurately express the truth concerning Monk
Gautama.”
   The ascetics burst out laughing. One said, “This bhikkhu must be newly
ordained. He doesn’t possess the ability to answer our question. No wonder he’s
trying to avoid giving an answer. We’d better let him go.”
   A few days later, Venerable Anuruddha presented the ascetics’ question to the
Buddha and said, “Lord, please enlighten us so that we can better answer such
questions when they arise.”
   The Buddha said, “Anuruddha, it is impossible to find Monk Gautama
through conceptual knowledge. Where is Monk Gautama? Anuruddha, can
Gautama be found in form?”
   “No, Lord.”
   “Can Gautama be found in feelings?”
   “No, Lord.”
   “Can Gautama be found in perceptions, mental formations, or
consciousness?”
   “No, Lord.”
   “Well then, Anuruddha, can Gautama be found outside of form?”
   “No, Lord.”
   “Can Gautama be found outside of feelings?”
   “No, Lord.”
   “Can Gautama be found outside of perceptions, mental formations, and
consciousness?”
   “No, Lord.”
   The Buddha looked at Anuruddha. “Where then can you find Gautama?
Anuruddha, right this moment as you stand before Gautama, you cannot grab
hold of him. How much less so after he dies! Anuruddha, the essence of


Gautama, like the essence of all dharmas, cannot be grasped by conceptual
knowledge or in the categories of mental discrimination. One must see the
dharmas in interdependent relation with all other dharmas. You must see
Gautama in all the dharmas normally thought of as non-Gautama, in order to see
the true face of Gautama.
   “Anuruddha, if you want to see the essence of a lotus flower, you must see the
lotus present in all the dharmas normally thought of as non-lotus, such as the
sun, pond water, clouds, mud, and heat. Only by looking in this way can we tear
asunder the web of narrow views, the web of mental discrimination which
creates the prisons of birth, death, here, there, existence, non-existence, defiled,
immaculate, increasing, and decreasing. It is the same if you want to see
Gautama. The ascetics’ four categories of existence, non-existence, both
existence and non-existence, and neither existence nor non-existence, are
spiderwebs among spiderwebs which can never take hold of the enormous bird
of reality.
   “Anuruddha, reality in itself cannot be expressed by conceptual knowledge or
by written and spoken language. Only the understanding which meditation
brings can help us recognize the essence of reality. Anuruddha, a person who has
never tasted a mango cannot know its taste no matter how many words and
concepts someone else uses to describe it to him. We can only grasp reality
through direct experience. That is why I have often told the bhikkhus not to lose
themselves in useless discussion that wastes precious time better spent looking
deeply at things.
   “Anuruddha, the nature of all dharmas is unconditioned and can be called
suchness, tathata. Suchness is the wondrous nature of all dharmas. From
suchness the lotus arises. Anuruddha arises from suchness. Gautama arises from
suchness. We can call someone who arises from suchness a tathagata, or ‘one
who thus comes.’ Arising from suchness, where do all dharmas return? All
dharmas return to suchness. Returning to suchness can also be expressed by the
term tathagata, or ‘one who thus goes.’ In truth, dharmas do not arise from
anywhere or go to any place, because their nature is already suchness.
Anuruddha, the truer meaning of suchness is ‘one who comes from nowhere,’
and ‘one who goes nowhere.’ Anuruddha, from now on, I will call myself
‘Tathagata’. I like this term because it avoids the discrimination that arises when
one uses the words, ‘I’ and ‘mine’.”
   Anuruddha smiled and said, “We know that all of us arise in suchness, but we
will reserve the name ‘Tathagata’ for you. Every time you refer to yourself as


‘Tathagata’, we will be reminded how we all have the nature of suchness which
has no beginning and no end.”
   The Buddha smiled too, and said, “The Tathagata is pleased with your
suggestion, Anuruddha.”
   Venerable Ananda was present at this conversation between the Buddha and
Venerable Anuruddha. He followed Anuruddha out of the hut and suggested that
they share the conversation with the rest of the community at the next day’s
Dharma discussion. Anuruddha happily agreed. He said he would introduce the
exchange by first recounting his meeting with the ascetics in Savatthi.


                               Chapter Seventy
                          The Quail and the Falcon
Although he had never been scolded or corrected by the Buddha, Bhikkhu Svasti
was aware of his own shortcomings. Perhaps the Buddha refrained from saying
anything critical of him because he could see Svasti’s wholehearted efforts to be
master of his six senses, even if his mastery was far from complete. Whenever
Svasti saw another bhikkhu or bhikkhuni being corrected, he took it to heart as if
he himself were the one at fault. This provided him with many opportunities to
deepen his practice. He especially took to heart any correction and guidance the
Buddha gave to Rahula. Rahula continued to make great strides in his practice,
and that benefited Svasti’s practice as well.
   Once while sitting in a forest glade with Rahula, Svasti expressed how
fortunate he felt to be a disciple of the Buddha. He said that because he had
tasted true peace, joy, and freedom, he had no more desire for the life of the
world. Rahula cautioned him, “While that may be true, don’t give yourself too
much credit too fast. The effort to continually observe and master the senses is
the very foundation of the practice, and not even the most senior disciples can
afford to grow lax in their practice.”
   Rahula told Svasti about Bhikkhu Vangisa, a monk renowned for his
intelligence and gift with language. He was, in fact, a fine poet who had
composed several gathas praising the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha which had
earned the Buddha’s compliments. When Vangisa first joined the sangha, he
studied under the guidance of Bhikkhu Nigrodhakappa in Aggalava, just outside
Savatthi. After Nigrodhakappa died, Vangisa went to dwell at Jetavana. One day
while out begging with Ananda, Vangisa confided that his mind was troubled,
and he asked for Ananda’s assistance. Ananda learned that Vangisa was
disturbed by the lust he felt for the young women who came to the monastery to
bring food offerings. Ananda understood that as an artist, Vangisa was easily
touched by beauty. Ananda appealed to that very sense in helping Vangisa see
how he could use the beauty of the path of awakening in order to transcend his
desires for the kind of fleeting beauty that creates only clinging and obstacles.
Ananda showed him how to shine his awareness on the objects of his


contemplation in order to see clearly the empty and impermanent nature of all
dharmas. Practicing according to Ananda’s instructions, Vangisa learned to
master the six senses. He wrote a poem about this practice which was now well
known to other monks. It went as follows:
     Even after donning the saffron robe,
     I chased after desires
     like a buffalo pining after the farmer’s rice.
     How ashamed I felt!
     A mighty general’s son
     gifted with bow and arrow
     might fend off the siege
     of even a thousand soldiers.
     Dwelling in Mindfulness,
     I will not be defeated,
     even before a throng of beautiful women.
     I follow the Lord
     who is a descendent of the sun.
     Serenely walking on this path
     all desire is released.
     Becoming master of my senses,
     I walk forth calmly.
     Though met by countless obstacles
     none can shake my peace.
   Because Vangisa was a man gifted with intelligence and talent, there were
times when his pride got the better of him, and he felt a quiet disdain for some of
the other monks. Luckily, thanks to his practice of mindfulness, he was able to
recognize this arrogance within himself. He composed a gatha on this theme:
     Disciples of Gautama,
     overcome arrogance!
     The path of pride
     leads only to suffering.
     The man who silently hides his arrogance
     is on the road to hell
     as surely as the man
     all bloated up by pride.


      Seek instead the happiness
      of a peaceful heart.
      Practice mindfulness
      to realize the three knowledges.
      True success can only come
      when arrogance is subdued.
   Thanks to his deep awareness, Vangisa was able to transcend many sorrows
and obstacles, and to make great strides on the path of transformation. He
attained the fruit of Never-Returner, confirmed by Venerable Sariputta. The day
his heart and mind were opened, Vangisa composed a poem to express his
gratitude to the Buddha:
      Intoxicated by youthful dreams,
      I wandered far and wide
      through marketplaces and countryside,
      until at last I met the Buddha!
      All compassionate, he shared
      the wondrous teaching with me.
      My faith was awakened
      and I donned the robes of a monk.
      Dwelling in awareness,
      focusing heart and mind,
      I have attained the three knowledges,
      thanks to the Awakened One!
      Far and wide, the Lord
      has sown the seeds of illumination.
      Because all beings dwell in darkness,
      he has shown the Way—
      the Four Noble Truths,
      the Noble Eightfold Path,
      Tranquility, Joy, and Freedom.
      His words so subtle and profound,
      his noble life without blame,
      skillfully, he leads all beings to liberation.
      How deep my gratitude!
   Once in a special teaching session held for the younger bhikkhus, Venerable


Sariputta held Bhikkhu Vangisa up as an example. He told them that in the
beginning of his practice, Vangisa was sometimes troubled by certain afflictions
and states of mind; but thanks to determined practice, he overcame such states
and attained great understanding. “Therefore,” Sariputta told the young monks,
“don’t let yourself be caught in any mental complex, whether an inferiority or a
superiority complex. Practicing mindfulness, you will be aware of everything
that is going on inside yourself and nothing will be able to entangle you.
Learning to master the six senses is a most wonderful method to make firm
progress along the path.”
   Listening to Rahula talk about Vangisa made Svasti feel as if he knew
Vangisa. Though he had met Vangisa, he had never had a real chance to speak
with him. He resolved to find an occasion to get acquainted with Venerable
Vangisa, for he knew he could learn much from Vangisa’s spiritual experience.
   Svasti remembered how the Buddha once used the image of the sea to explain
the practice of mastering the six senses. The Buddha said, “Bhikkhus, your eyes
are a deep ocean in which are concealed sea monsters, whirlpools, and perilous
currents. If you don’t proceed in mindfulness, your boat will be attacked and
submerged by the sea monsters, whirlpools, and perilous currents. Your ears,
nose, tongue, body, and mind are also deep oceans in which are concealed sea
monsters.”
   Recalling those words, Svasti’s understanding increased manifold. The six
senses were indeed deep oceans whose hidden waves could rise at any moment
to submerge one. Rahula’s advice was well worth heeding—he should not rest
on any laurels. The Buddha’s teaching should be practiced continuously.
   One afternoon, as he sat outside his hut at Jetavana monastery, the Buddha
told the younger bhikkhus a story to remind them to observe and master their six
senses and not allow themselves to be lost in forgetfulness. The Buddha
recounted, “One day a falcon swooped down and caught a young quail in her
talons. As she flew back into the sky, the quail began to cry. He chastised
himself for wandering away from where his parents had told him to stay—‘If
only I had listened to my parents, I would not be in this predicament.’
   “The falcon asked, ‘And where did your parents tell you to stay, you runt?’
The quail answered, ‘In the newly plowed field.’
   “To the quail’s surprise, the falcon said, ‘I can catch any quail I want anytime
I want. I will return you to that field and offer you one more hour of life. I will
be looking for you, and in just an hour I will catch you, break your little neck,
and eat you at once.’ And the falcon swooped down again and released the quail


in the newly plowed field.
   “Surprisingly, the young quail immediately climbed up on a mound of newly
plowed earth and began to taunt the falcon. ‘Hey, falcon, why wait an hour?
Why don’t you fly back down and try to catch me right now?’
   “Angered, the falcon tucked her wings close to her sides and shot down at full
speed. But the quail quickly ducked for cover in the furrow beneath the mound
of earth, and the falcon missed the quail and landed with such force that she
broke her breastbone and was killed instantly.
   “Bhikkhus, you must dwell in mindfulness at all times and master your six
senses. When you leave mindfulness, you enter the domain of Mara, and danger
is unavoidable.”
   Svasti was encouraged by the number of sincere and talented young bhikkhus
in the Buddha’s sangha. One day he was invited with several other monks to the
home of a layperson named Citta, who lived in the village Macchikasanda. It
was on this outing that Svasti learned how bright one of these young bhikkhus
was. Lay disciple Citta was well known for his devotion to the teaching. Because
of his large and generous heart, he was deeply loved by the people just as lay
devotee Anathapindika was loved. Citta enjoyed inviting senior disciples to his
home in order to offer them food and ask them questions on the Dharma. On this
particular day, he had invited ten senior monks and two young monks, Svasti and
Isidatta. After the monks were finished eating, Citta bowed to them respectfully
and then asked if he could sit before them on a low stool.
   He asked them the following question, “Respected Venerables, I have heard
the Brahmajala Sutra in which the Buddha discusses the sixty-two false views of
contemporary sects. I have also heard the questions raised by members of other
sects concerning life, death, and the soul, such as: is the world finite or infinite,
temporal or everlasting, are body and mind one or two, will the Tathagata still
exist after his death or cease to exist, will he both exist and cease to exist, or will
he neither exist nor cease to exist. Venerables, what gives rise to these esoteric
kinds of views and questions?”
   Not one of the bhikkhus ventured to answer Citta’s question, even after he
repeated it three times. Svasti was embarrassed, and felt his ears turning warm.
Suddenly Isidatta spoke. He turned towards the senior bhikkhus and asked,
“Respected elders, may I respond to lay disciple Citta’s question?”
   The senior monks answered, “Bhikkhu, you may answer his question if you
wish.”
   Turning back towards Citta, Isidatta said, “Sir, such views and questions arise


because people still cling to a false view of the self. If the idea of a separate self
were abandoned, people would no longer have a need to cling to such views or
ask such questions.”
   Citta was visibly impressed by the young bhikkhu’s response. He said,
“Please, Venerable, could you explain this more clearly.”
   “People without a chance to be exposed to and to study the Way of Awakening
generally think of the body as being the same as one’s self, or they think that the
self is contained in the body and the body is contained in the self. Likewise, they
consider feelings to be the same as the self, or they think that feelings are
contained in the self and the self is contained in feelings. Such people hold the
same views as regards their perceptions, mental formations, and consciousness.
They are caught in a false view of self. It is precisely because they are caught in
a false view of self that they become entrapped by the sixty-two false views
discussed in the Brahmajala Sutra and by questions about the finite and infinite,
temporal and everlasting, one and two, existing and ceasing to exist. Lay disciple
Citta, such questions and views are rendered meaningless when, through
dedicated study and practice, one breaks through the false view of self.”
   Increasingly impressed by the young bhikkhu, Citta respectfully asked
Isidatta, “Venerable, where are you from?”
   “I come from Avanti.”
   “Venerable, I have heard about a young man from Avanti named Isidatta who
became a bhikkhu. It is said that he is remarkably bright and able. Though I have
heard his name, I have never seen him. Have you ever met him?”
   “Yes, Citta, I have met him.”
   “Then, Venerable, can you tell me where this talented young monk is at
present?”
   Isidatta did not answer.
   In fact, Citta had already guessed that the young bhikkhu sitting before him
was Isidatta. He asked, “Can it be that you yourself are Bhikkhu Isidatta?”
   “Yes, sir,” replied Isidatta.
   Citta was overjoyed and exclaimed, “This is a great honor for me! Respected
Venerable Isidatta, my mango grove and private residence in Macchikasanda are
refreshing places equipped with every convenience. I hope you will come to visit
us often. We offer you whatever you may need—food, robes, medicine, or a
place to stay.”
   Isidatta did not say anything. The bhikkhus thanked Citta and departed. Svasti
later heard that Isidatta never returned to Citta’s home. Isidatta did not desire


lavish praise or offerings, not even from such a well-respected man as Citta.
Though Svasti did not meet Isidatta again for some time, the image of the bright
and humble bhikkhu remained engraved on his mind. Svasti pledged to follow
Isidatta’s example and to seek him out whenever he had a chance to pass through
Avanti.
   Svasti knew how much the Buddha loved young bhikkhus who showed
determination, wisdom, and concern for the welfare and happiness of others. The
Buddha expressed how greatly he depended on these young monks to transmit
the teaching to future generations. However, Svasti observed how devoted the
Buddha was in teaching all the bhikkhus, regardless of their individual abilities.
Some monks encountered more difficulties than others. There was one monk
who abandoned the community six times but was still welcomed back by the
Buddha for another effort. The Buddha never ceased to offer kindly
encouragement to those monks who found it difficult to remember even such
simple practices as the sixteen methods of observing the breath.
   There was a monk named Bhaddali who lived at Jetavana. The Buddha was
well aware of Bhaddali’s shortcomings, but he chose to overlook them in order
to provide the bhikkhu with an opportunity to transform himself. Bhaddali
seemed incapable of following a number of monastic disciplines. For instance,
during meals every bhikkhu was expected to remain seated until he had finished
eating. Standing up during the meal for second helpings or to tend to other tasks
was not allowed. This discipline was called One Sitting for Meals. Bhaddali
never managed to remember this discipline. His behavior around the monastery
was a frequent cause of distress to the other bhikkhus. The Buddha called him
aside a number of times and taught him to ask himself this question every
morning upon arising, “What can I do today to contribute to the community’s
happiness?” But after several months, Bhaddali appeared to have made little if
any progress. A number of bhikkhus grew impatient with Bhaddali and spoke
harshly to him. Aware of this, one day the Buddha addressed the community.
   He said, “Bhikkhus, although an individual in the sangha may possess a
number of serious flaws, there undoubtedly remains within him at least a few
seeds of faith and love. We must relate to such an individual in a way that will
protect and nurture those seeds of faith and love, lest they, too, perish. Take the
example of a person who loses an eye in an accident. His family and friends will
do everything in their power to protect his remaining eye, because they know
how bleak his future will be if he loses it. Thus, bhikkhus, help protect the seeds
of faith and love in your brother by treating him kindly.”


   Svasti was present when the Buddha spoke these words. He was deeply
moved by the Buddha’s loving attitude. He looked up and saw Ananda wiping
away tears and knew that Ananda, too, had been touched.
   Although the Buddha was kind-hearted and gentle, he could also be stern
when the occasion called for it. A person who could not be helped by the Buddha
was truly a person without a future. One day Svasti was present when a short but
impressive conversation took place between the Buddha and a man called Kesi,
who was a well-known horse trainer.
   The Buddha asked Kesi, “Can you please explain to us how you go about
training a horse?”
   Kesi answered, “Lord, horses have different temperaments. Some are quite
docile and can be trained by the simple use of gentle words. Others are more
difficult and require a firm hand along with gentle methods. Others are still more
stubborn and require the use of firm discipline alone.”
   The Buddha laughed and asked, “What do you do when you encounter a horse
that won’t respond to any of those three methods?”
   “Lord, in that situation it is necessary to kill the horse. If it is allowed to live
with the other horses, it will spoil them all. Lord, for my part, I would like to
know how you train your disciples.”
   The Buddha smiled. He said, “I do the same as you. Some monks respond to
gentleness alone. Others require firmness along with gentleness. Others can only
make progress when given stern discipline.”
   “And what do you do in the case of a monk who doesn’t respond to any of
those methods?”
   The Buddha said, “I do as you do. I kill him.”
   The horse trainer’s eyes widened in alarm. “What? You kill him? I thought
you were against killing.”
   The Buddha explained, “I do not kill him in the same way you kill a horse.
When a person does not respond to any of the three methods we’ve just
discussed, we refuse to let him join the sangha of bhikkhus. I do not accept him
as my student. That is an extreme misfortune. Being refused the chance to
practice the Dharma in community is to lose an opportunity that only arises once
in a thousand lifetimes. What is that if not death to the spiritual life? It isn’t just
a pity for the person refused. It is as much a pity for me, for I feel great love and
concern for that person. I never stop hoping that one day he will open himself up
to the practice and come back to us.”
   Long ago, Svasti had heard the Buddha scold and counsel Rahula. He had also


witnessed the Buddha correct a number of other bhikkhus. He now understood
more deeply the profound love behind the Buddha’s rebukes. Svasti also knew
how much the Buddha loved him even though the Buddha never said so aloud.
Svasti needed only to look into the Buddha’s eyes to know.
   That night, the Buddha received a guest, and Ananda asked Svasti to prepare
tea. The guest was a warrior with proud and aristocratic bearing who traveled
with a shining sword slung across his back. He dismounted his steed outside
Jetavana and left his sword tucked in the saddle. Sariputta showed him to the
Buddha’s hut. He was a man of impressive height. His strides were long and he
had a piercing gaze. Ananda told Svasti that the warrior’s name was Rohitassa.
   When Svasti entered the hut to serve tea, he found Rohitassa and Sariputta
sitting before the Buddha on low stools. Ananda was standing behind the
Buddha. After serving the three men tea, Svasti stood next to Ananda behind the
Buddha. The men drank their tea in silence. After a long pause, Rohitassa spoke,
“Lord, is there any world in which there is no birth, old age, sickness, or death?
Is there any world in which beings never die? By what means of travel can one
leave this world of birth and death behind in order to arrive at a world in which
death does not exist?”
   The Buddha answered, “There are no means of travel by which you can leave
this world of birth and death, no matter how fast you might go, even if you travel
at the speed of light.”
   Rohitassa joined his palms and said, “You speak the truth. I know for a fact
that it is not possible to escape this world of birth and death through any means
of travel, no matter how fast one is able to go. I can recall a past life in which I
possessed supernatural powers and was able to fly through the air faster than an
arrow. With one step I could leap from the Eastern Sea all the way to the Western
Sea. I was determined to escape the world of birth, old age, sickness, and death,
in order to find a world in which beings were no longer oppressed by birth and
death. Day after day I traveled at great speed, never stopping to eat or drink, rest
or sleep, urinate or defecate. For a hundred years I went at that great speed, but
arrived nowhere, until one day I died by the side of a road. Lord, your words are
indeed true! Truly one can never escape the world of birth and death by any
means of travel, even if one can fly at the speed of light.”
   The Buddha said, “I did not say, however, that one cannot transcend the world
of birth and death. Listen, Rohitassa, you can indeed transcend this world of
birth and death. I will show you the path by which you may do so. In your very
own body six feet tall, the world of birth and death has its origins, and in that


same body are the means to transcend the world of birth and death. Contemplate
your body, Rohitassa. Shine your awareness on the world of birth and death as it
unfolds in your own tall body. Contemplate until you can see the truth of
impermanence, emptiness, birthlessness, and deathlessness of all dharmas.
Before you, the world of birth and death will dissolve and the world of
birthlessness and deathlessness will reveal itself. You will be freed from every
sorrow and fear. You do not need to travel anywhere in order to leave the world
of suffering and death. You need only look deeply into the nature of your own
body.”
   Svasti noticed how Sariputta’s eyes glistened like stars as he listened to the
Buddha. Warrior Rohitassa’s face also radiated happiness. Svasti was profoundly
moved. Who could fathom how wondrous and majestic the Buddha’s teaching
was? It was like a piece of epic music. More clearly than ever, Svasti saw how
the key to liberation lay right in his own hand.


                           Chapter Seventy-One
                         The Art of Stringing a Sitar
When the retreat season ended, the Buddha returned south. He stopped by the
Deer Park in Isipatana, the place he had delivered his first Dharma talk on the
Four Noble Truths thirty-six years earlier. Though it seemed like only yesterday,
much had changed since then. Since the first turning of the wheel of Dharma, the
Dharma had been carried throughout all the countries in the Ganga basin. The
local people in Isipatana had built a stupa to commemorate the first turning, and
a monastery had been built, where many bhikkhus lived and practiced. After
teaching the Dharma and encouraging the community there, the Buddha
departed for Gaya.
   He stopped by Uruvela to visit the ancient bodhi tree, which he found more
lovely and green than ever. Many huts were now scattered throughout the forest.
King Bimbisara was also planning to build a stupa that would commemorate the
spot where the Buddha attained Awakening. The Buddha stopped to visit the
village children. They were no different from the children of years gone by. The
buffalo boy Svasti was now forty-seven years old and a respected elder in the
sangha. The village children gathered ripe papayas to offer the Buddha. Every
child in the village could recite the three refuges.
   From Gaya, the Buddha headed northeast to Rajagaha. As soon as he reached
the capital, he headed for Vulture Peak. There he met Venerable Punna, who told
him all about his work to teach the Dharma on Sunaparanta island. Punna had
just completed a retreat season there with several other bhikkhus. The number of
people in Sunaparanta who had taken refuge in the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha
had already risen to five hundred.
   Throughout the following days, the Buddha visited the spiritual centers
scattered throughout the region. One night while sitting in meditation at one
center, he heard a monk chanting sutras. There was something disturbing about
the voice, as though the monk was tired and discouraged. The Buddha could tell
that the monk was encountering difficulties in his practice. The next morning he
asked Venerable Ananda about it and learned that the monk chanting the sutras
in the night was Sona. The Buddha remembered meeting Sona several years


before in Savatthi.
   Venerable Sona Kulikanna was ordained under the guidance of Venerable
Maha Kaccana and studied with him for several years on Pavatta mountain in the
Kururaghara region. Sona was a young man from a wealthy family. He was
refined and intelligent but had a frail constitution. He had to make great efforts
to endure the homeless life of a bhikkhu, eating only one meal a day and
sleeping beneath the trees. But his devotion to the practice never wavered. After
a year, he was brought by his teacher to meet the Buddha in Savatthi.
   That first time in Savatthi, Buddha asked Sona, “Sona, are you enjoying good
health? Are you experiencing any difficulties in your practice, in begging, or in
spreading the Dharma?”
   Sona answered, “Lord, I am very happy. I am not experiencing any
difficulties.”
   The Buddha instructed Ananda to prepare a place for Sona to sleep that night
in the Buddha’s hut, and so Venerable Ananda placed another bed there. That
night the Buddha sat in meditation outside until three in the morning. Aware of
that, Sona was unable to fall asleep. When the Buddha entered the hut, he asked
Sona, “Aren’t you asleep yet?”
   “No, Lord, I am still awake.”
   “Aren’t you sleepy? Well then, why don’t you recite some gathas you have
memorized.”
   Venerable Sona recited the sixteen gathas contained in the Sutra on the Full
Awareness of Breathing. His voice was as clear as a bell. He did not stumble
over any word or leave any word out. The Buddha praised him,
   “You recite most beautifully. How many years has it been since you were
ordained?”
   “Lord, it has been a little more than a year. I have the experience of only one
retreat season.”
   That was the first time the Buddha and Sona met. Now, when the Buddha
heard Sona’s chanting, he knew that Sona had overexerted himself. He asked
Ananda to accompany him to Sona’s hut. Seeing the Buddha, Sona stood up at
once to greet him. Buddha asked both Sona and Ananda to be seated beside him,
and then he asked Sona, “Before you became a monk, you were a musician,
were you not? You specialized in the sixteen- string sitar, didn’t you?”
   “Yes, Lord, that is correct.”
   The Buddha asked Sona, “If you play the sitar while the strings are slack,
what is the result?”


   Sona answered, “Lord, if the strings are slack, the sitar will be out of tune.”
   “And what if the strings are too taut?”
   “Lord, if the strings are too taut, the strings are more likely to break.”
   “And if the strings are just right, neither too slack nor too taut?”
   “Lord, if the strings are just right, the sitar will provide fine music.”
   “Just so, Sona! If one is idle or lazy, one will not make progress in the
practice. But if one tries too hard, one will suffer fatigue and discouragement.
Sona, know your own strength. Don’t force your body and mind beyond their
limits. Only then can you attain the fruits of practice.”
   Venerable Sona stood up and bowed to the Buddha to express his gratitude for
the Buddha’s insight.
   One afternoon, physician Jivaka visited the Buddha. He found the Buddha
returning from Bamboo Forest and asked if he might walk up with him to his hut
on Vulture Peak. Jivaka watched with admiration as the Buddha climbed the
stone steps. The Buddha, now seventy-two years old, was as healthy and
energetic as ever. He walked with relaxed, leisurely steps, one hand carrying his
bowl, the other lifting the corner of his robe. Venerable Ananda walked in the
same manner. Jivaka offered to take the Buddha’s bowl, and the Buddha handed
it to him with a smile. He said, “But you know, the Tathagata has climbed this
mountain hundreds of times, always carrying his own bowl without difficulty.”
   The carefully carved stone steps that wound up the mountainside had been a
gift from King Bimbisara, Jivaka’s father. When they climbed the last of them,
the Buddha invited Jivaka to sit with him on a large rock outside his hut. Jivaka
inquired about the Buddha’s health and travels. Then he looked first at Venerable
Ananda, and then at the Buddha. In a solemn voice, he said, “Lord, I feel I must
tell you about the situation here. Events taking place in the sangha are directly
related to the current political situation in the kingdom. I believe you should
know what is happening.”
   The physician told the Buddha that it had become clear that Venerable
Devadatta desired to replace the Buddha as the leader of the sangha. He already
had considerable support among many bhikkhus, as well as among the ruling
elite. Venerable Kokalika was his chief advisor. He also had the backing of
Venerables Kotamoraka Tissa, Khandadeviputta, and Samuddadatta, all of whom
had large numbers of students. Venerable Devadatta was both intelligent and
eloquent. He was deeply respected by many bhikkhus and lay disciples. He had
not come out and stated directly that he was opposed to the Buddha or the
Buddha’s senior disciples, but he made frequent allusions to the Buddha’s


advancing years, questioning whether he still possessed the ability to guide the
sangha. He had even insinuated that the Buddha’s approach to the teaching was
too outdated to meet the needs of young people. Devadatta enjoyed support from
several wealthy disciples. Prince Ajatasattu, for reasons Jivaka was unable to
understand, was Devadatta’s most devoted supporter. As much as King
Bimbisara revered the Buddha, Ajatasattu revered Devadatta. He had a large
spiritual center built for Devadatta on Gayasisa mountain, the very place where
the Buddha had delivered the Fire Sutra to the Kassapa brothers and their one
thousand disciples. The prince personally brought food offerings to the center
every few days. Merchants and politicians, wanting to get in the good graces of
the prince, brought offerings and attended Devadatta’s Dharma talks as well.
Devadatta’s influence was growing daily. Already three to four hundred
bhikkhus had pledged their support to him.
   Jivaka looked at the Buddha and then lowered his voice, “Lord, I do not
consider the things I have just recounted sufficient to cause worry on their own,
but there is one thing that does concern me greatly—I have learned that
Ajatasattu is impatient to assume the throne in order to implement his own
agendas. He feels that our father has monopolized the throne for too long, in the
same way that Venerable Devadatta is impatient for you to pass the mantle of
leadership on to him. It is, in fact, my belief that Venerable Devadatta has
planted some dangerous thoughts in the prince’s head. Lord, I receive this
impression every time I visit the palace to tend after the royal family’s health. If
something unexpected were to happen to King Bimbisara, you and your sangha
could be implicated. Please, Lord, take heed.”
   The Buddha answered, “Thank you, Jivaka, for telling the Tathagata about the
situation. It is important to know what is going on. Don’t worry. I will see to it
that the sangha is not dragged into any unfortunate circumstances.”
   Jivaka bowed to the Buddha and returned down the mountain. The Buddha
instructed Ananda not to speak to anyone about what Jivaka had shared.
   Ten days later, the Buddha gave a Dharma talk to a gathering of three
thousand disciples at Bamboo Forest. King Bimbisara was among those present.
The Buddha spoke about the Five Powers necessary to nourish the fruits of
enlightenment. They are confidence, energy, mindfulness, concentration, and
true understanding.
   When the Buddha had finished speaking and before anyone else had a chance
to ask him any questions, Venerable Devadatta stood and bowed to the Buddha.
He said, “Lord, you are now advanced in years. Your health is no longer what it


once was. You deserve to rest undisturbed and to lead a life free of any irritations
for the final years of your life. The task of leading the sangha is too heavy for
you, Lord. Please retire. I would be willing to serve as leader of the bhikkhus.”
   The Buddha looked at Devadatta. He answered, “Devadatta, thank you for
your concern, but the Tathagata still possesses good health and strength adequate
to lead the sangha.”
   Venerable Devadatta turned to the community. Three hundred bhikkhus stood
up and joined their palms. Devadatta said to the Buddha, “There are many other
bhikkhus who agree with me. Please, Lord, have no worries. I have the ability to
lead the sangha. Allow me to relieve you of your burden.”
   The Buddha said, “Enough, Devadatta, say no more. There are several senior
disciples who possess abilities greater than yours, and I have not asked any of
them to assume the leadership of the sangha. How much less would I be inclined
to transfer the leadership to you. You do not yet possess the ability to lead the
community of bhikkhus.”
   Venerable Devadatta felt humiliated before the great gathering. His face
turned red, and he sat back down in anger.
   The following day at Vulture Peak, Venerable Ananda confided to the
Buddha, “Lord, I feel great pain over my brother Devadatta’s actions. I am afraid
that he will seek some form of revenge against you since you criticized him in
front of the community. I am afraid a schism may occur in the sangha. With your
permission, I would like to speak privately with Devadatta and and offer him
some counsel.”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, I spoke severely to Devadatta before the king and
community, because I wanted to make it clear that I have not chosen Devadatta
to succeed me as leader of the bhikkhus. Any actions he undertakes now will be
in his own name. Ananda, if you think that speaking with him will help him
calm down, please do so.”
   A few days later Jivaka paid a visit to the Buddha. He informed the Buddha
that he had heard that Devadatta was plotting to create a great division in the
sangha, but by what means, he did not yet know.


                          Chapter Seventy-Two
                                Quiet Resistance
It was the day of the Buddha’s weekly Dharma talk at Bamboo Forest. A large
crowd was assembled to hear him, including King Bimbisara and Prince
Ajatasattu. Venerable Ananda noticed that the number of bhikkhus attending
from other centers was even greater than at the two previous Dharma talks.
Venerable Devadatta was there, sitting between Venerables Sariputta and
Mahakassapa.
   Once again, as soon as the Buddha was finished speaking, Venerable
Devadatta stood up and bowed to the Buddha. He said, “Lord, you teach the
bhikkhus to live a simple life free of desires and to use only what is truly needed.
I would like to propose five new rules which would make our commitment to
simple living greater.
   “First, bhikkhus should dwell in the forests and never be allowed to sleep in
villages or towns.
   “Second, bhikkhus should beg only and never accept invitations to eat in the
homes of lay disciples.
   “Third, bhikkhus should sew their robes from discarded scraps and rags and
never receive robes as offerings from lay disciples.
   “Fourth, bhikkhus should sleep only beneath the trees and not in huts or
buildings.
   “Fifth, bhikkhus should eat only vegetarian food.
   “Lord, if bhikkhus followed these five rules, they would succeed in living a
simple life of few desires.”
   The Buddha answered, “Devadatta, the Tathagata cannot accept your rules as
mandatory. Any bhikkhu who wishes to dwell only in the forests has permission
to do that. But it is fine for others to live in huts, monasteries, villages, and
cities. Any bhikkhu who wishes to only beg for his food may refuse invitations
to eat in the homes of lay disciples. But others should feel free to accept such
invitations as they provide occasions to help share the teaching. Any bhikkhu
who wishes to sew his own robes from scraps and rags is free to do so. But it is
fine for others to accept robes from lay disciples, as long as bhikkhus do not


possess more than three robes. Any bhikkhu who wishes to sleep only beneath
the trees is welcome to do so. But it is all right for others to sleep in huts and
buildings. Any bhikkhu who wishes to eat only vegetarian food may do so. But
others may accept food offerings containing meat when they are sure the animal
was not killed expressly for them. Devadatta, under the present order, bhikkhus
have many opportunities to make contact with the laity. They are able to share
the teaching with those who are just becoming acquainted with the Way of
Awakening.”
   Venerable Devadatta asked, “Then you do not accept these five rules?”
   The Buddha answered, “No, Devadatta, the Tathagata does not accept them.”
   Devadatta bowed and sat back down. His mouth was turned up in a self-
satisfied smile.
   That night as the Buddha rested in his hut at Bamboo Forest, he said to
Ananda, “The Tathagata understands Devadatta’s intentions. I believe there will
soon be a serious split in our community.”
   Not long after that, Venerable Ananda met Venerable Devadatta in Rajagaha.
They stopped to talk along the side of the road. Devadatta informed Ananda that
he was setting up his own sangha and would hold his own precepts recitations,
confession ceremonies, retreat seasons, and Pavarana Days for his followers,
separate from the Buddha’s sangha. Deeply saddened, Venerable Ananda
informed the Buddha of Devadatta’s decision. At the next confession ceremony
that took place at Bamboo Forest, Ananda noticed that several hundred bhikkhus
who normally attended were absent. He knew they were attending the ceremony
at Devadatta’s center instead.
   When the ceremony was over, several bhikkhus went to the Buddha’s hut to
speak with him. They said, “Lord, bhikkhus who have sided with Devadatta are
approaching many of us, exhorting us to join Venerable Devadatta’s sangha.
They claim his rules are more upright than yours. They hold up your refusal to
accept Venerable Devadatta’s five rules as proof. They claim that monastic life at
Bamboo Forest is too soft, not much different from life as a layperson. They say
you only talk about living simply but won’t institute the five rules that would
assure that the bhikkhus lived such a life. They say you are hypocritical. Lord,
we were not swayed by their arguments. Our faith rests with your wisdom. But
many young bhikkhus who lack experience in the practice, especially those
originally ordained by Devadatta, are drawn to the more austere practice of the
five rules. They are leaving the sangha to follow Venerable Devadatta. We felt
we should inform you.”


   The Buddha answered, “Please do not give this matter too much thought. The
most important thing is your own practice of the noble and pure life of a monk.”
   Several days later Jivaka visited the Buddha on Vulture Peak to inform him
that Devadatta now commanded a following of more than five hundred
bhikkhus. They were all dwelling at Devadatta’s Gayasisa headquarters. Jivaka
also informed the Buddha of secret political stirrings in the capital in which
Devadatta was playing a key role. Jivaka suggested that the Buddha make a clear
statement that Devadatta was no longer considered a member of the Buddha’s
sangha.
   News of Venerable Devadatta’s independent sangha spread quickly. The
bhikkhus were asked about it everywhere they went. Venerable Sariputta
instructed them to answer all questions by simply saying, “Those who sow bad
seeds reap bad fruits. Causing the community to break is the most serious
violation of the teaching.”
   One day while speaking to several bhikkhus, the Buddha mentioned that
Jivaka had counselled him to make a formal announcement that Venerable
Devadatta was no longer considered a member of the Buddha’s sangha. Sariputta
reflected on Jivaka’s suggestion and then said, “Lord, we often publicly praised
Venerable Devadatta’s ability and virtue in the past. How will it look if we now
denounce him?”
   The Buddha asked, “Sariputta, in the past when you publicly praised
Devadatta, were you speaking the truth?”
   “Yes, Lord, I was speaking the truth when I praised Venerable Devadatta’s
ability and virtue.”
   “Will you be speaking the truth now if you denounce brother Devadatta’s
actions?”
   “Yes, Lord.”
   “Then there is no problem. The important thing is to speak the truth.”
   At a gathering of lay persons some days later, the bhikkhus announced to the
people that the Venerable Devadatta had been expelled from the Buddha’s
sangha and that henceforth the sangha could not assume responsibility for
Venerable Devadatta’s actions.
   Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana remained curiously silent throughout
these events. They did not even answer the laity’s questions. Venerable Ananda
noticed their reticence and said to them, “Brothers, you have not offered any
views on Venerable Devadatta’s actions. Perhaps you have some plan of your
own?”


   They smiled and Venerable Moggallana said, “That is correct, brother
Ananda. We will serve the Buddha and the sangha in our own way.”
   Many of the laity gossiped about the schism and blamed it on jealousy and
petty feelings. Others understood that there must be deeper unrevealed reasons
for the Buddha to denounce Venerable Devadatta. Their faith in the Buddha and
the sangha did not waver.
   One stormy morning, the people in the capital were shocked to learn that King
Bimbisara was abdicating the throne in favor of his son, Prince Ajatasattu. The
coronation ceremony for the new king was scheduled to take place ten days later
on the day of the full moon. The Buddha was concerned that he did not learn of
these plans directly from King Bimbisara. The king had always consulted with
the Buddha in the past before making major decisions. His concern that
something was amiss was confirmed when Jivaka paid him a visit some days
later.
   The Buddha and Jivaka did walking meditation together along a mountain
path. They took slow, quiet steps while observing their breath. After a time, the
Buddha invited Jivaka to sit with him on a large rock. Jivaka informed the
Buddha that Prince Ajatasattu had placed King Bimbisara under house arrest.
The king was confined to his chambers. No one but Queen Videhi was allowed
to see him. The king’s two most trusted advisors had also been placed under
arrest because the prince feared they would try to prevent his coronation from
taking place. Their families were falsely informed that they needed to remain at
the palace for several days in order to assist with important political matters.
   Jivaka told the Buddha that the only reason he knew about these events was
because he had been called to tend to an illness of the queen’s. She told him how
a month earlier, the imperial guards had caught the prince about to enter the
king’s chambers late one night. Finding his behavior suspicious, they searched
him and discovered a sword concealed under his robes. They led him into the
king’s chambers and told the king of their discovery. The king looked at his son
and asked, “Ajatasattu, why were you carrying a sword into the royal chamber?”
   “It was my intention to kill you, Father.”
   “But why would you want to kill me?”
   “I want to be king.”
   “Why must you kill your own father to be king? If you but asked me, I would
have abdicated in your favor at once.”
   “I did not think you would do that. I have obviously made a grave error and
beg you to forgive me.”


   The king asked his son, “Who put you up to this?”
   Prince Ajatasattu did not answer at first, but after his father’s persistent
questioning, he confessed that the idea had been Venerable Devadatta’s.
Although it was the middle of the night, the king summoned his two most trusted
advisors to ask for their counsel. One advisor said that trying to assassinate the
king was a crime punishable by death and therefore the prince and Venerable
Devadatta should both be beheaded. He even demanded the deaths of all the
bhikkhus.
   The king disagreed. “I cannot kill Ajatasattu. He is my own son. As for the
bhikkhus, they have already made it clear that they cannot be held responsible
for the actions of Venerable Devadatta. The Buddha had true foresight in this
matter. Suspecting Venerable Devadatta capable of harmful acts, he disavowed
Venerable Devadatta’s relation to his sangha. But I do not wish to kill Venerable
Devadatta either. He is the Buddha’s own cousin and has been a respected
bhikkhu for many years in the past.”
   The second advisor exclaimed, “Your compassion has no equal, your Majesty!
You are a worthy student of the Lord Buddha. But how do you propose to deal
with this matter?”
   The king said, “Tomorrow I will let it be known to the people that I am
abdicating the throne in favor of my son, Prince Ajatasattu. His coronation can
take place in ten days.”
   “But what of his crime of attempted assassination?”
   “I forgive both my son and Venerable Devadatta. Hopefully, they will learn
something from my forgiveness.”
   The two advisors bowed low to their king, as did Prince Ajatasattu. The king
ordered the guards to keep the entire incident secret. The next day, after hearing
the king’s announcement, Venerable Devadatta hurriedly made his way to the
capital. He requested an audience with the prince. Later the prince told the queen
that Venerable Devadatta had come to assist him in planning the coronation
ceremony. But all the queen knew was that two days after her son’s meeting with
the bhikkhu, her husband and his two closest advisors were placed under house
arrest. Jivaka ended by saying, “Lord Buddha, I only pray that the prince will
release the king and advisors after his coronation has taken place.”
   The next day, a royal messenger arrived with an invitation to the Buddha and
his bhikkhus to attend the coronation ceremony. Soldiers were already busy
decorating the city gates and streets with flags and lanterns. The Buddha learned
that Venerable Devadatta planned to attend the ceremony accompanied by six


hundred of his own bhikkhus. The Buddha summoned Venerable Sariputta and
said, “Sariputta, I will not attend the coronation ceremony. It is my wish that
none of our bhikkhus attend, either. We cannot lend any sign of support to this
cruel and unjust affair.”
   The absence of the Buddha and all his bhikkhus was blatantly noticeable on
the day of the coronation, causing questions to rise in the people’s minds. Before
long, they learned the truth that King Bimbisara and his advisors had been
placed under house arrest. There grew among the people a quiet but steadfast
resistance to the new regime. Although Venerable Devadatta called himself a
leader, the people began to notice differences between how his bhikkhus handled
themselves and how the bhikkhus of the Buddha did. The people began to refuse
to give any food offerings to Devadatta’s followers. Their refusal to support
Devadatta was simultaneously a condemnation of the new king.
   King Ajatasattu was infuriated when he was told of the people’s quiet refusal
to lend him support. But he did not dare move against the Buddha or his sangha,
for he was wise enough to know that if he did so, a mighty protest would well up
among the people, and from the neighboring kingdoms, where the Buddha was
held in great esteem. He knew that King Pasenadi of Kosala might even send
soldiers if he heard that the Buddha had been arrested or harmed in any way. The
king summoned Venerable Devadatta for further counsel.


                          Chapter Seventy-Three
                                   Hidden Rice
Late one night, while sitting in meditation on Vulture Peak, the Buddha opened
his eyes to see a man half-concealed behind a nearby tree. The Buddha called to
him. Beneath the bright moonlight, the man came forward, laid a sword at the
Buddha’s feet, and prostrated himself as if making an offering.
   The Buddha asked, “Who are you and why have you come here?”
   The man exclaimed, “Allow me to bow before you, Teacher Gautama! I was
ordered to come and kill you but I cannot do it. I raised this sword in my two
hands more than ten times while you were meditating, but I was unable to take
even one step towards you. I cannot kill you, but now I am afraid that my master
will kill me. I was trying to decide what to do when you called to me. Allow me
to bow before you!”
   The Buddha asked, “Who gave you orders to come kill the Tathagata?”
   “I dare not tell you my Master’s name!”
   “Very well, you need not tell me his name. But what did he tell you to do?”
   “Master, he told me which path to climb up the mountain and he showed me a
different path to return by after completing my mission.”
   “Do you have a wife and children?”
The man exclaimed, “Teacher Gautama, I was ordered to kill you, but I cannot
do it!”


   “No, Teacher, I am not yet married. I have only an aged mother.”
   “Then listen to me, and follow my instructions carefully. Return home at once
and escape tonight with your mother across the border into Kosala. You and your
mother can find a new life there. Do not return by the road your master showed
you. If you take that route, you are sure to be ambushed and killed yourself. Go
now!”
   The man prostrated himself once more and then hurriedly left, leaving the
sword behind.
   The next morning, Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana came to speak with
the Buddha. They said, “We believe it is time the two of us paid a visit to the


other side. We want to help our brothers who, out of ignorance, have taken a
wrong turn. We request your permission to be gone for a period of time.”
   The Buddha looked at his two disciples and said, “Go if you feel you must,
but take special care. Do all you can to protect your own lives.”
   Just at that moment, Venerable Sariputta noticed the sword lying on the
ground. He looked into the Buddha’s eyes as if to question him. The Buddha
nodded and said, “Yes, last night a soldier came here with orders to kill the
Tathagata, but the Tathagata has offered him guidance instead. Leave the sword
there. When Jivaka calls, I will ask him to dispose of it.”
   Moggallana looked at Sariputta and said, “Perhaps it would be better not to
leave the Buddha in such circumstances. What do you think, my brother?”
   Before Sariputta could respond, the Buddha said, “Do not worry. The
Tathagata is capable of avoiding any dangers that arise.”
   That afternoon several bhikkhus from Bamboo Forest came to see the Buddha.
They were so distraught, they were unable to speak. Tears rolled down their
cheeks. The Buddha asked them, “What is the matter? Why are you crying?”
   One bhikkhu wiped his tears and answered, “Lord, we have just come from
Bamboo Forest. On the road we met brothers Sariputta and Moggallana. When
we asked them where they were headed, they said they were crossing over to
Gayasisa. We are so upset we cannot hold back our tears. More than five
hundred other bhikkhus have abandoned the sangha, but we never expected your
two most esteemed disciples to forsake you.”
   The Buddha smiled and comforted the bhikkhus by saying, “Bhikkhus, do not
grieve. The Tathagata trusts Sariputta and Moggallana. They will not betray the
sangha.”
   Eased, the bhikkhus sat quietly at the Buddha’s feet.
   The following day, Jivaka invited the Buddha for a meal offering at his Mango
Grove. Venerable Ananda accompanied the Buddha. When they were finished
eating, Jivaka informed them that Queen Videhi happened to be visiting. He
wondered if the Buddha would mind meeting with her. The Buddha understood
that Jivaka had secretly arranged this meeting to take place, and he asked Jivaka
to summon the former queen.
   After she bowed to the Buddha, the queen began to sob. The Buddha let her
ease her pain and then he gently said, “Please tell me everything.”
   The queen said, “Lord, King Bimbisara’s life is in grave danger. Ajatasattu
plans to starve him to death. He won’t allow me to bring any more food to my
husband.”


   She told the Buddha that when the king had first been placed under house
arrest, she had been allowed to bring him food each day. Then one day the
guards confiscated the tray of food she was bringing to the king before allowing
her to enter his chambers. She told the Buddha how, even though she wept,
Bimbisara had consoled her and told her that he bore no hatred towards their son
for his actions. He said he would rather suffer hunger than have the country
plunged into war. The next morning, the queen hid small rice balls in her hair
while also carrying a platter of food. The guards took away the platter, but the
rice in her hair went undetected. She managed to feed her husband in such a
manner for several days. But when the king did not die, Ajatasattu ordered the
guards to more thoroughly search the queen. They discovered the hidden rice,
and she was no longer able to bring him food that way.
   Three days later she devised another plan. She mixed a paste of milk, honey,
and flour which she spread over her body after bathing and drying herself. When
the paste was dry, she put on her clothes. When the guards found no rice in her
hair, they allowed her to enter the king’s chamber. Once inside, she undressed
and scraped off the paste to feed him. She had fed her husband twice now in this
manner, but she feared she would soon be discovered and forbidden to visit him
at all.
   The former queen began to sob again. The Buddha sat silently. After a long
moment, he asked about the king’s state of health, both physical and spiritual.
The queen said that although he had lost a lot of weight, his strength was holding
up, and his spirit was most elevated. He expressed no feelings of hatred or
regret. He continued to smile and carry on a conversation as if nothing had
happened. He was using his time as a prisoner to practice meditation. There was
a long corridor in his chamber where he did walking meditation. The room also
had a window which faced Vulture Peak. He gazed at the mountain everyday for
long periods and did his sitting meditation at the same window.
   The Buddha asked the queen whether or not she had been able to send news to
her brother King Pasenadi. She replied that she had no means to do so. The
Buddha said he would send a bhikkhu to Savatthi and ask King Pasenadi to help
her any way he could.
   The queen thanked the Buddha. She then confided how before Prince
Ajatasattu was born, the royal astrologers predicted he would betray his father.
One day during her pregnancy she was suddenly seized with a bizarre urge to
bite King Bimbisara’s finger and suck his blood. She was frightened and
shocked by her desire, unable to believe she could give rise to so terrible a


thought. From the time she was a little girl, she had always been afraid of the
sight of blood and could not even bear to watch a fish or chicken slaughtered.
Yet on that day she desired nothing more than to taste her husband’s blood. She
struggled against her urge with all her strength until she finally burst into tears.
Overcome with shame, she covered her face in her hands but would not tell the
king what was disturbing her. One day not long after that, King Bimbisara
accidentally cut his finger while peeling a piece of fruit. Unable to control
herself, the queen grabbed his finger and sucked the drops of blood. The king
was startled but he did not stop her. Then the queen collapsed to the floor and
sobbed. Alarmed, the king helped her up and asked her what the matter was. She
told him of her strange and terrible desire. She told him how she had struggled
against it but had finally been defeated. She knew that the baby growing within
her was the source of her violent urge.
   The royal astrologers suggested the baby be aborted or killed at birth. King
Bimbisara could not agree to such a thing and neither could the queen. When the
prince was born, they named him Ajatasattu which means “the enemy not born.”
   The Buddha advised the queen to visit her husband only once every two or
three days to prevent arousing Ajatasattu’s suspicions. She could spend a longer
time with him on the days she did visit him. He also suggested that the king eat
only a small amount of the nourishing paste at a time in order to save some for
the days the queen did not visit. After offering these suggestions to the queen,
the Buddha bid farewell to Jivaka and returned to Vulture Peak.


                          Chapter Seventy-Four
                         Cry of the Elephant Queen
   Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana returned to Bamboo Forest after
spending a little over a month at Gayasisa. The bhikkhus joyously welcomed
them back. They asked the two venerables about the situation at Gayasisa, but
Sariputta and Moggallana only smiled. A few days later, more than three
hundred bhikkhus from Devadatta’s sangha returned to Bamboo Forest. The
bhikkhus at Bamboo Forest were overjoyed and they greeted their Gayasisa
brothers warmly. Four days later Venerable Sariputta took an exact count of the
brothers who had returned from Gayasisa and learned there were three hundred
eighty in all. He led them together with Venerable Moggallana to Vulture Peak to
have an audience with the Buddha.
   As he stood outside his hut, the Buddha watched the bhikkhus being led up
the mountain by his two senior disciples. Other bhikkhus who lived on Vulture
Peak came out of their huts to greet the returning monks. Sariputta and
Moggallana left the monks for a moment in order to speak privately with the
Buddha. They bowed to the Buddha, who invited them to sit down. Venerable
Sariputta smiled and said, “Lord Buddha, we have brought back nearly four
hundred bhikkhus.”
   The Buddha said, “You have done well. But tell me, how were you able to
open their eyes?”
   Venerable Moggallana explained, “Lord, when we first arrived, Brother
Devadatta had just finished eating and was preparing to give a Dharma talk. He
looked very much as though he were trying to imitate you. When he looked up
and saw us approaching, he appeared enormously pleased. He invited Sariputta
to sit next to him on the Dharma platform. But Sariputta refused and chose to sit
by one side instead. I sat on the other side. Devadatta then addressed the other
bhikkhus. He said, ‘Today Venerable Sariputta and Venerable Moggallana have
joined us. They were my close friends in the past. Let me take this chance to
invite Venerable Sariputta to give the Dharma talk today.’
   “Devadatta turned to Sariputta and joined his palms. My brother accepted the
invitation to speak. He spoke about the Four Noble Truths in a most beautiful


way. All the bhikkhus listened as if spellbound. But I noticed Devadatta’s eyes
growing heavy as if he wanted to fall asleep. No doubt he was tired from all his
recent activities. Halfway through the Dharma talk, he was fast asleep.
   “We stayed at Gayasisa for more than a month and participated in all the
activities there. Every three days, Brother Sariputta gave a Dharma talk. He
instructed the bhikkhus with all his heart. Once I noticed Bhikkhu Kokalita,
Devadatta’s chief advisor, whisper something to Devadatta, but Devadatta
seemed to pay him little attention. I suspect Kokalita was warning him not to
trust us. Devadatta, however, was glad to have someone assume responsibility
for teaching the Dharma, especially when it was someone as capable as my
brother Sariputta.
   “One day, after delivering a discourse on the Four Establishments of
Mindfulness, Sariputta said, ‘This afternoon, my brother and I will be leaving
you to return to the Buddha and the sangha he leads. Dear brothers, there is only
one fully enlightened Master and that is the Teacher Gautama. The Buddha
founded the sangha of bhikkhus. He is the source for all of us. I know that you
would be warmly welcomed back by the Buddha if you returned. Dear brothers,
there is nothing more painful than seeing a community divided. I have met only
one true Master in my life and that is the Buddha. We will depart from you
today, but should any of you decide to return to the Buddha, please come to
Bamboo Forest. We will meet you there and take you to meet with the Buddha
on Vulture Peak.’
   “That day, Devadatta was in the capital on business, but Venerable Kokalita,
who had been hostile to us since our arrival, stood up to protest. He even hurled
curses at us, but we simply stood up and pretended not to hear. We silently took
our bowls and extra robes and left Gayasisa to return to Venuvana. We stayed in
Venuvana for five days. Three hundred and eighty bhikkhus from Gayasisa
followed shortly.”
   Venerable Sariputta asked, “Lord, do these bhikkhus need to be re-ordained?
If necessary, I will organize an ordination ceremony for them before they meet
with you.”
   The Buddha said, “That is not necessary, Sariputta. It will be adequate for
them to make a confession before the community.”
   The two senior disciples bowed and rejoined the waiting bhikkhus.
   Over the next few days, thirty-five more bhikkhus left Gayasisa. Venerable
Sariputta arranged a confession ceremony for them and then presented them to
the Buddha. Venerable Ananda spoke to the thirty-five newest arrivals and asked


them about the situation at Gayasisa. They told him that after Venerable
Devadatta had returned from Rajagaha and learned that nearly four hundred
bhikkhus had abandoned him to return to the Buddha, his face turned scarlet in
anger. He refused to speak to anyone for several days.
   Ananda asked, “What did Brothers Sariputta and Moggallana say to you that
made you want to leave Brother Devadatta and return to the Buddha?”
   One of the bhikkhus answered, “They never spoke a critical word against
Venerable Devadatta or the Gayasisa sangha. They simply taught the Dharma
with all their hearts. Most of us have only been ordained two or three years and
still lack stability and depth in our practice. When we heard Brother Sariputta’s
Dharma talks and received personal instruction from Brother Moggallana, we
saw how marvelous and sublime the teaching of the Buddha truly is. The
presence of Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana with their profound
understanding and virtue was like the presence of the Buddha himself. We
realized that although Venerable Devadatta speaks with great skill, he could not
compare with them. After Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana departed, many
of us discussed these things and reached the decision to return to the Buddha.”
   Ananda asked, “What did Bhikkhu Kokalita do when you left?”
   “He was enraged. He cursed us, but that only made us all the more determined
to leave.”
   One afternoon as the Buddha stood on the mountain slope admiring the
evening sky, he suddenly heard a shout from below, “Watch out, Lord! A boulder
is about to crash behind you!”
   The Buddha looked back to see a boulder the size of a cattle cart crashing
down the mountain towards him. It was difficult to move out of the way in time
as the mountain path was suddenly covered with sharp and jutting stones. By a
stroke of luck, the boulder was blocked by two other rocks on the mountainside
just before reaching the Buddha. But the impact of rock against rock sent a
fragment flying which pierced the Buddha’s foot. Blood gushed from his wound
and stained his robes. Looking up, the Buddha saw a man at the top of the
mountain running quickly away.
   His wound was very painful. He folded his sanghati in four and placed it on
the earth. He sat down on it in a lotus position and began to concentrate on his
breath in order to calm the pain. Bhikkhus came running towards him. One
exclaimed, “This is surely the work of Devadatta!”
   Another said, “Brothers, let us divide ourselves into patrols to guard the
mountain and protect the Lord Buddha. Let’s not lose any time!”


   Everyone ran about in circles, disturbing the previously calm evening. The
Buddha said, “Brothers, please do not shout. Nothing warrants such noise. The
Tathagata does not need to be guarded or protected. Please return to your huts.
Ananda, send novice Cunda for physician Jivaka.”
   They obeyed the Buddha’s wishes. Jivaka came up to Vulture Peak in no time
at all and asked that the Buddha be carried in a palanquin down to the mango
grove.
   Within a few short days, people in the capital learned of the two attempts on
the Buddha’s life. They were shocked and dismayed. Not only that, but they
received the announcement that King Bimbisara had died. Through unknown
channels, the people learned how he died under house arrest. Agony filled the
people’s hearts. They looked towards Vulture Peak as a symbol of moral
resistance. As they grieved for the king, their admiration for the Buddha
deepened. Though the Buddha had chosen to remain silent about recent events,
his silence had been well understood by the people.
   King Bimbisara was sixty-seven years old when he died. He was five years
younger than the Buddha. He had taken the three refuges with the Buddha when
he was just thirty-one years old. Having ascended to the throne at the age of
fifteen, he then reigned for fifty-two years. It was he who rebuilt the capital of
Rajagaha after it had been destroyed by fire. Throughout his reign, Magadha had
enjoyed continuous peace with the exception of one short war with the kingdom
of Anga. King Brahmadatta of Anga lost the war and Anga temporarily fell
under the jurisdiction of Magadha. When King Taxila Pukkusati later assumed
the throne in Anga, King Bimbisara maintained close and friendly relations with
him to prevent future conflicts. Thanks to that, the new king also became a
disciple of the Buddha. King Bimbisara had always understood the importance
of maintaining good relations with neighboring kingdoms. He married Princess
Kosaladevi, the younger sister of King Pasenadi of Kosala, and made her his
queen. He also took wives from the Madra and Licchavi dynasties. His elder
sister was married to the king of Kosala.
   King Bimbisara showed his deep love and respect for the Buddha by having a
stupa built in the royal gardens which contained the Buddha’s hair and
fingernails. Incense and candles were regularly lit around the foot of the stupa to
express gratitude for the Buddha’s teaching. The king entrusted Srimati, a lady-
in-waiting at the palace, with the stupa’s upkeep. Srimati tended all the flowers
and plants around the stupa and kept the area well swept.
   Just ten days after the boulder was hurled at the Buddha, he and several


bhikkhus were begging in the capital, when Venerable Ananda looked up to see
an elephant charging towards them. It appeared to have escaped from the royal
stables. He recognized that it was the elephant named Nalagiri, infamous for its
violent behavior. Ananda could not understand how the royal keeper could have
allowed it to escape. Panic-stricken, people ran for cover. The elephant raised its
trunk, lifted its tail and ears, and headed straight for the Buddha. Ananda
grabbed the Buddha’s arm to lead him to safety, but the Buddha would not
budge. He stood calmly, unperturbed. Some bhikkhus cowered behind him while
others fled. People shouted at the Buddha to save himself. Ananda held his
breath and stepped forward to place his body between the Buddha and Nalagiri.
At that very moment, to Ananda’s surprise, the Buddha let forth a majestic cry. It
was the cry of the Elephant Queen the Buddha had befriended long ago in
Rakkhita Forest in Parileyyaka.
   Nalagiri was but a few yards from the Buddha when he heard the resounding
cry, and he came to a sudden halt. The mighty elephant knelt on all fours and
lowered his head to the ground as if to bow to the Buddha. The Buddha gently
stroked Nalagiri’s head and then, holding the elephant’s trunk in one hand, led an
obedient Nalagiri back to the royal stables.
   The people applauded and cheered. Ananda smiled. He thought back to the
days when they were youngsters. The young Siddhartha had known no equal in
the martial arts. He excelled at everything—archery, weightlifting,
swordsmanship, horseracing-and today, the Buddha treated an elephant on a
rampage as though he were an old and docile friend. The bhikkhus and a large
crowd followed the Buddha and the elephant back to the stables. When they
arrived, the Buddha gave the keeper a stern look, but then spoke in a
compassionate voice, “The Tathagata does not need to know who ordered you to
release this elephant. But you should understand the seriousness of your action.
Dozens, even hundreds, of people could have been killed. You must never allow
such a thing to happen again.”
The Buddha gently stroked Nalagiri’s head.


   The keeper bowed before the Buddha. The Buddha helped him back to his
feet, and then joined the bhikkhus to resume begging.
   The Buddha and all his bhikkhus attended King Bimbisara’s funeral. The
ceremony was an event of great solemnity and beauty. The people grieved the
passing of their beloved monarch and showed up in dense crowds to pay their
final respects. More than four thousand bhikkhus were present.
   When the funeral was over, the Buddha spent the night at Jivaka’s Mango
Grove before returning to Vulture Peak. The physician informed him that the
former queen Videhi had been forbidden to visit the king at all during the past
month. The king passed from this life all alone. They found him lying down


before his favorite window. His eyes were turned towards Vulture Peak when he
took his last breath.
  Shortly after the king’s funeral, Jivaka brought Prince Abhayaraja, son of
King Bimbisara and his wife Padumavati, to see the Buddha. The prince
requested to take vows as a bhikkhu. He told the Buddha that since his father’s
death, he had lost all enthusiasm for a life of wealth or fame. He had heard many
of the Buddha’s Dharma talks and felt drawn to the path of enlightenment. He
desired nothing more than to lead the peaceful, unburdened life of a bhikkhu.
The Buddha accepted Prince Abhayaraja into the sangha of bhikkhus.


                         Chapter Seventy-Five
                             Tears of Happiness
Ten days later, the Buddha put on his outer robe, took his begging bowl, and left
the city of Rajagaha. He headed north across the Ganga, stopped along the way
to visit Kutagara monastery, and then made his way to Savatthi. It would soon be
the rainy season again, and he needed to return to Jetavana to prepare for the
annual retreat. Venerables Ananda, Sariputta, Moggallana, and three hundred
other bhikkhus accompanied him.
   When they reached Savatthi, the Buddha walked directly to Jetavana. Many
bhikkhus and bhikkhunis had gathered to await his arrival. They had heard of
events in Magadha and were relieved to see the Buddha unharmed and in good
health. Bhikkhuni Khema was present. She now served as abbess to the
bhikkhunis.
   King Pasenadi came to see the Buddha the moment he learned of his arrival.
He asked the Buddha about the situation in Rajagaha and listened as the Buddha
recounted everything, including his meeting with Queen Videhi, King Pasenadi’s
own sister. The Buddha told him that while she maintained a calm composure,
he knew her heart was filled with grief and sorrow. King Pasenadi told the
Buddha that he had already sent a delegation to Rajagaha to ask Ajatasattu, his
nephew, to explain the imprisonment of King Bimbisara. A month had already
passed but no response had been received. King Pasenadi sent further word that
if the new king deemed it necessary, he could come to Savatthi in person to
explain the situation. King Pasenadi informed the Buddha that in order to
demonstrate his opposition to the events in Magadha, he had reclaimed the
territory he offered to Magadha many years ago on the occasion of his sister’s
marriage to King Bimbisara. This land was located close to the city of Varanasi
in Kasi.
   The first day of the retreat season arrived. All the spiritual centers and
monasteries in the region were filled to overflowing with bhikkhus and
bhikkhunis. Every ten days, the Buddha gave a Dharma talk at Jetavana to all the
monks and nuns. These talks always took place following the noon meal. Monks
and nuns who walked from the more distant centers did not have enough time to


go begging if they wanted to arrive in time for the discourse. Lay disciples in the
city worked hard to assure there was always enough food waiting for these
monks and nuns.
   The first Dharma talk the Buddha delivered that season was on the subject of
happiness. He told the assembly that happiness is real and can be realized in the
very midst of daily life. “First of all,” the Buddha said, “happiness is not the
result of gratifying sense desires. Sense pleasures give the illusion of happiness,
but in fact they are sources of suffering.
   “It is like a leper who is forced to live alone in the forest. His flesh is wracked
by terrible pain day and night. So he digs a pit and makes a fierce fire, and he
stands over it to seek temporary relief from his pain by toasting his limbs over
the fire. It is the only way he can feel any comfort. But, miraculously, after a few
years, his disease goes into remission, and he is able to return to a normal life in
the village. One day he enters the forest and sees a group of lepers toasting their
limbs over hot flames just as he once did. He is filled with pity for them, for he
knows that in his healthy state he could never bear to hold his limbs over such
fierce flames. If someone tried to drag him over the fire he would resist with all
his might. He understands that what he once took to be a comfort, is actually a
source of pain to one who is healthy.”
   The Buddha said, “Sense pleasures are like a pit of fire. They bring happiness
only to those who are ill. A healthy person shuns the flames of sense desires.”
   The Buddha explained that the source of true happiness is living in ease and
freedom, fully experiencing the wonders of life. Happiness is being aware of
what is going on in the present moment, free from both clinging and aversion. A
happy person cherishes the wonders taking place in the present moment—a cool
breeze, the morning sky, a golden flower, a violet bamboo tree, the smile of a
child. A happy person can appreciate these things without being bound by them.
Understanding all dharmas as impermanent and without a separate self, a happy
person does not become consumed even by such pleasures. A happy person thus
lives in ease, free from all worry and fear. Because he understands that a flower
will soon wilt, he is not sad when it does. A happy person understands the nature
of birth and death of all dharmas. His happiness is true happiness, and he does
not even worry about or fear his own death.
   The Buddha told the assembly that some people believe it is necessary to
suffer in the present in order to have happiness in the future. They make
sacrifices and endure hardships of body and mind, thinking they can acquire
happiness in the future. But life exists only in the present moment. That kind of


sacrifice is a waste of life. Other people think that if you want peace, joy, and
liberation in the future, you must practice self-mortification in the present. They
practice austerities, starve themselves, and inflict pain on their minds and bodies.
The Buddha taught that such practices cause suffering for the person in both the
present and the future. Still others contend that because life is so fleeting, they
should not concern themselves with the future at all. They may try to satisfy all
their sense desires in the present. The Buddha explained that clinging to sense
pleasures this way causes suffering in both the present and the future.
   The path the Buddha taught avoided both extremes. He taught that the most
intelligent way is to live in a way that fosters happiness for both the present and
the future. The way of liberation does not force austerities on the body in the
hope of attaining future happiness. A bhikkhu creates happiness for himself and
for all those around him in the present moment by the way in which he eats his
daily meal, meditates, and practices the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, the
Four Limitless Meditations, and the Full Awareness of Breathing. Eating only
one meal a day keeps his body healthy and light, and allows more time for
spiritual practice. Living in ease and freedom, he is better able to help others.
Bhikkhus remain celibate and childless, not as a practice of austerity, but as a
means of being more free to help others. The bhikkhu is able to see the
happiness that is present in each moment of daily life. If he feels his chastity
deprives him of happiness, he is not living the spirit of the teaching. A bhikkhu
who follows the teaching of celibacy according to its true spirit radiates ease,
peace, and joy. Such a life brings happiness in both the present and future.
   After the Dharma talk, lay disciple Punnalakkhana asked the Buddha if she
could speak to him. She told the Buddha that her husband, Sudatta
Anathapindika, had fallen gravely ill. He was in such great pain he was unable to
attend the Dharma talk. His condition was steadily worsening. He feared he
would die before having a chance to see the Buddha one last time.
   The next day the Buddha, together with Venerables Sariputta and Ananda,
went to visit Sudatta. Sudatta was deeply moved to see them. His face was pale
and drawn and he could barely sit up. The Buddha said to him, “Sudatta, your
entire life has been filled with meaning and happiness. You have relieved the
suffering of countless others, moving the people to bestow upon you the name of
Anathapindika, ‘the one who cares for the poor and abandoned.’ Jetavana
monastery is one of your many fine accomplishments. You have constantly
contributed to efforts to spread the Dharma. You have lived according to the
teaching and have thus created true happiness for yourself, your family, and


many others. You can rest now. I will ask Venerable Sariputta to visit you often
and provide you special guidance. Don’t try to come to the monastery. You
should reserve your strength.”
   Sudatta joined his palms in gratitude.
   Fifteen days later, the Buddha gave a Dharma talk on lay life. He told the laity
how they could realize true happiness in their daily lives. He reviewed the
principle of living for “peace in the present, peace for the future” which he had
presented in his previous Dharma talk to the monks and nuns. He also said, “A
bhikkhu lives a celibate life in order to enjoy peace and joy in the present
moment. Such a life assures future happiness as well. But homeless bhikkhus are
not the only ones who can enjoy such happiness. Lay disciples living in the
world can follow the principles of the teaching to foster true happiness. First of
all, do not let a desire for wealth cause you to become so consumed by your
work that you prevent happiness for yourself and your family in the present
moment. Happiness is foremost. A look filled with understanding, an accepting
smile, a loving word, a meal shared in warmth and awareness are the things
which create happiness in the present moment. By nourishing awareness in the
present moment, you can avoid causing suffering to yourself and those around
you. The way you look at others, your smile, and your small acts of caring can
create happiness. True happiness does not depend on wealth or fame.”
   The Buddha recalled a conversation he had had with a merchant named Sigala
several years previously in Rajagaha. One morning, the Buddha left Bamboo
Forest with his begging bowl just as daylight was breaking. He came upon a
young man on a path just outside the city. Sigala was bowing to the six
directions of East, West, South, North, Down, and Up. The Buddha stopped and
asked him the purpose of his bowing. Sigala said that his father had taught him
as a child to bow to the six directions every morning. He liked to obey his
father’s wishes, but he did not actually know the purpose for the ritual.
   The Buddha told him, “Bowing is a practice which can foster happiness for
both the present and the future.” He told Sigala that as he bowed to the East he
could contemplate gratitude to his parents. When he bowed to the South, he
could contemplate gratitude to his teachers. Bowing West, he could contemplate
love for his wife and children. Bowing to the North, he could contemplate love
for his friends. Bowing down, he could contemplate gratitude to his co-workers.
Bowing up, he could contemplate gratitude to all wise and virtuous persons.
   The Buddha taught Sigala the five precepts and how to look deeply at things
in order to avoid acting out of greed, anger, passion, or fear. The Buddha told


Sigala to avoid the six actions which lead to ruin—abusing alcohol, wandering
through city streets late at night, frequenting places of gambling, visiting places
of depravity, loitering with persons of poor character, and succumbing to
laziness. In addition, he told Sigala how to determine who was worthy of being
considered a good friend. He said, “A good friend is constant. Whether you are
rich or poor, happy or sad, successful or unsuccessful, a good friend is one
whose feelings for you do not waver. A good friend listens to you and shares
your sufferings. He shares his own joys and sorrows with you, while regarding
your joys and sorrows as his own.”
    The Buddha continued his Dharma talk by saying, “True happiness can be
realized in this very life, especially when you observe the following:
    “1. Foster relations with people of virtue and avoid the path of degradation.
    “2. Live in an environment that is conducive to spiritual practice and builds
good character.
    “3. Foster opportunities to learn more about the Dharma, the precepts, and
your own trade in greater depth.
    “4. Take the time to care well for your parents, spouse, and children.
    “5. Share time, resources, and happiness with others.
    “6. Foster opportunities to cultivate virtue. Avoid alcohol and gambling.
    “7. Cultivate humility, gratitude, and simple living.
    “8. Seek opportunities to be close to bhikkhus in order to study the Way.
    “9. Live a life based on the Four Noble Truths.
    “10. Learn how to meditate in order to release sorrows and anxieties.”
    The Buddha praised lay disciples who lived the teaching in their daily lives
within their families and society. He made special mention of Sudatta
Anathapindika. He said that Sudatta was an exemplar of one who devoted all his
efforts to creating a life full of meaning, service, and happiness. Sudatta’s heart
was truly deep. His entire life had been guided by the teaching. The Buddha said
that people who owned far greater wealth than Sudatta would not find it easy to
match the happiness he had created for others. Sudatta’s wife, Punnalakkhana,
was moved to tears by the Buddha’s praise of her husband.
    She stood up and respectfully addressed the Buddha, “Lord, a wealthy
person’s life is often very busy, especially when he owns many things. I think
that maintaining a small and modest vocation would be more conducive to
spiritual practice. When we see the bhikkhus, free of home and family, who own
little more than a bowl, we long for a more simple, carefree life ourselves. We
would like to live a leisurely life, too, but we are bound by so many


responsibilities. What can we do?”
   The Buddha answered, “Punnalakkhana, bhikkhus have responsibilities too. A
celibate life requires a bhikkhu to live mindfully by the precepts day and night.
A bhikkhu devotes his life to others. Lay disciples, the Tathagata wishes to
suggest a way by which you can taste the life of a bhikkhu twice a month or so.
We shall call this practice the Eight Observances for the Laity. Twice a month
you can come to the temple and follow these practices for a day and a night.
Like the bhikkhus, you will eat only one meal. You can practice sitting and
walking meditation. For twenty-hours you can enjoy a celibate, aware,
concentrated, relaxed, peaceful, and joyous life as if you were a monk or nun.
When the day is over, you can return to your secular life, observing the five
precepts and three refuges as usual.
   “Lay disciples, the Tathagata will inform the bhikkhus about the Eight
Observances for the Laity. These special days of practice can be organized at
temples or even in your own homes. You can invite bhikkhus to your homes to
administer the eight observances and to offer teaching on your day of practice.”
   Punnalakkhana was pleased with the Buddha’s suggestion. She asked, “Please,
Lord, what are the eight observances?”
   The Buddha answered,“Do not kill, do not steal, do not engage in sexual
activity, do not lie, do not use alcohol, do not adorn yourself with jewelry, do not
sit or lie on a fancy bed, and do not use money. These eight observances can
prevent forgetfulness and confusion. Eating only one meal on your day of
practice will allow more time for your practice.”
   The people were happy with the Buddha’s suggestion for special days of
practice for the laity.
   Ten days later, a servant from Sudatta’s household came to inform Venerable
Sariputta that Sudatta’s illness had taken a turn for the worse. Sariputta asked
Ananda to join him and together they walked into the city. They found Sudatta
lying on his bed. A servant pulled two chairs close to the bed for the bhikkhus.
   Knowing that Sudatta was suffering greatly in his body, Venerable Sariputta
advised him to practice contemplating on the Buddha, the Dharma, and the
Sangha, to ease the pain. “Lay disciple Sudatta, let us contemplate together on
the Buddha, the Enlightened One; on the Dharma, the Way of Understanding and
Love; and on the Sangha, the Noble Community which lives in harmony and
awareness.”
   Knowing that Sudatta did not have much longer to live, Venerable Sariputta
told him, “Lay disciple Sudatta, let us contemplate as follows—my eyes are not


me, my ears are not me, my nose, my tongue, my body, and my mind are not
me.”
   Sudatta followed Sariputta’s instructions. Then Sariputta continued, “Now let
us continue to contemplate—that which I see is not me, that which I hear is not
me, that which I smell, taste, touch, and think are not me.”
   Sariputta then showed Sudatta how to contemplate on the six sense
consciousnesses—seeing is not me, hearing is not me, smelling, tasting,
touching, and thinking are not me.”
   Sariputta continued, “The element earth is not me. The elements water, fire,
air, space, and consciousness are not me. I am not bound or restrained by the
elements. Birth and death cannot touch me. I smile because I have never been
born and I will never die. Birth does not give me existence. Death does not take
existence away.”
   Suddenly Sudatta began to weep. Startled to see tears roll down the lay
disciple’s cheeks, Ananda asked him, “Are you upset, Sudatta, because you are
unable to follow the contemplation?”
   Sudatta answered, “Venerable Ananda, I am not upset at all. I am able to
follow the contemplation without difficulty. I weep because I am so deeply
moved. For more than thirty years I have had the honor of serving the Buddha
and the bhikkhus. But I have never heard a more sublime and profound teaching
than this teaching today.”
   Ananda said, “Sudatta, the Lord Buddha frequently offers this kind of
teaching to the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis.”
   “Venerable Ananda, lay disciples are also able to understand and practice such
a teaching. Please ask Lord Buddha to share this teaching with the laity.”
   Sudatta died later that day. Venerables Sariputta and Ananda remained with
him and continued to recite sutras over his body. Anathapindika’s family was a
model for all other families. All the members of his family took refuge in the
Buddha and devoted themselves to studying and applying the Dharma in their
daily lives. A few days before his death, Sudatta learned that his youngest
daughter, Sumagadha, was sharing the teaching with people in Anga. She had
married a man from Anga who was a governor and a devout follower of the
unclothed ascetics. When he asked her to visit the ascetics with him, she
diplomatically declined. Over time, her solid understanding of the Buddha’s Way
touched her husband and opened the hearts of many people in their region.


                            Chapter Seventy-Six
                             The Fruits of Practice
Just as the retreat season was ending, the sangha learned that war had broken out
between Kosala and Magadha. Magadha’s army, led by King Ajatasattu
Videhyputta himself, had crossed over the Ganga into Kasi, a region under
Kosala’s jurisdiction. The king and his generals led an enormous battalion of
elephants, horses, carts, artillery, and soldiers. Because it all happened so
quickly, King Pasenadi was unable to inform the Buddha of his departure to
Kasi. He asked Prince Jeta to explain the situation in his place.
   The Buddha already knew that after King Pasenadi learned how Ajatasattu
killed his own father to usurp the throne, King Pasenadi showed his opposition
by reclaiming a district near Varanasi he had formerly presented to King
Bimbisara. For nearly seventy years this district had brought in revenues of over
a hundred thousand gold pieces to Magadha, and King Ajatasattu was not about
to give it up. So he called his soldiers into battle.
   Venerable Sariputta instructed all the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis to remain in
Savatthi. It was too dangerous to travel with a war raging. He also asked the
Buddha to remain in Savatthi until peace was restored.
   Two months later the people of Savatthi received the disheartening news that
their army had suffered defeat in Kasi. King Pasenadi and his generals were
forced to retreat back to the capital. The situation was fraught with tension, but
thanks to a strong system of defense, Savatthi did not fall, even though
Ajatasattu’s generals attacked day and night. Then, thanks to a brilliant plan
devised by General Bandhula, King Pasenadi was able to mount a major counter-
offensive. This time Kosala scored the decisive victory. King Ajatasattu and all
his generals were captured alive. More than a thousand soldiers were taken
prisoner. Another thousand had either been killed or fled. In addition, Kosala
confiscated large numbers of elephants, horses, army carts, and supplies of
artillery.
   The war had raged for more than six months. The people of Savatthi
organized a victory celebration. After dismantling his army, King Pasenadi
visited the Buddha at Jetavana. He described the terrible cost of the war and said


that Kosala had acted in self-defense when King Ajatasattu attacked their
borders. He added that he believed King Ajatasattu had been wrongly influenced
by his advisors.
   “Lord Buddha, the king of Magadha is my own nephew. I cannot kill him, nor
do I have any desire to put him in prison. Please help me find a wise course of
action.”
   The Buddha said, “Your majesty, you are surrounded by loyal friends and
aides. It is no surprise that you came out the victor in this war. King Ajatasattu is
surrounded by bad elements and so he has gone astray. The Tathagata suggests
you treat him with all the respect due a king of Magadha. Take time, as well, to
guide him as your own nephew. Strongly impress on him the importance of
surrounding himself with friends and aides of good and loyal character. Then
you can send him back to Magadha with proper ceremony. The possibility of
lasting peace depends on your skill in handling these matters.”
   The Buddha called for a young bhikkhu named Silavat and introduced him to
King Pasenadi. Bhikkhu Silavat was originally a prince, one of King Bimbisara’s
sons, and King Ajatasattu’s half-brother. Silavat was a wise and bright man who
had studied the Dharma as a lay disciple under the guidance of Venerable
Moggallana from the age of sixteen. After the changes that took place in
Magadha, he asked Moggallana to allow him to be ordained, and he was sent to
Jetavana in Savatthi to further his studies. Venerable Moggallana knew that
although Silavat harbored no desire for the throne, it would nonetheless be safer
for him to be out of King Ajatasattu’s jealous reach.
   King Pasenadi asked the young bhikkhu to describe the situation in Rajagaha.
Silavat told the king all he had seen and heard before he left Magadha. He also
informed the king that someone had been sent from Magadha to try and kill him,
but he had been able to effect a change of heart in the assassin. That man was
now an ordained bhikkhu himself living in a center close to the capital. King
Pasenadi bowed to the Buddha and returned to his palace.
   Shortly afterwards, King Ajatasattu was released and allowed to return to
Magadha. Using love to ease the wounds of hatred, King Pasenadi gave his own
daughter, Princess Vajira, in marriage to Ajatasattu. Ajatasattu was now his son-
in-law as well as his nephew. King Pasenadi also promised to return the district
near Varanasi as a wedding gift. King Pasenadi had wholeheartedly followed the
spirit of the Buddha’s counsel.
   With the war over, bhikkhus and bhikkhunis once again took to the road to
spread the teaching. King Pasenadi ordered the construction of a new monastery


on the outskirts of the capital and named it Rajakarama.
   The Buddha remained in Kosala for the following two years, passing the
retreat seasons at Jetavana and the rest of the time teaching throughout the
region. From time to time he received news from Magadha from bhikkhus who
had come from there. They told him that after the Buddha left Magadha,
Venerable Devadatta ceased to enjoy the good graces of King Ajatasattu. Of the
more than one hundred bhikkhus still with Devadatta at that time, eighty had
returned to the Buddha’s sangha at Bamboo Forest. Devadatta was more and
more isolated. He had recently fallen ill and was unable to leave Gayasisa. Since
the end of the war, King Ajatasattu had not paid him even one visit. King
Ajatasattu did not pay any visits to Bamboo Forest either. He only maintained
relations with leaders of other religious sects. Nonetheless, the sangha continued
to spread the Dharma unimpeded. The laity and bhikkhus in Magadha hoped that
the Buddha would return to visit them. Vulture Peak and Bamboo Forest seemed
empty without him. Jivaka awaited his return as well.
   That winter Queen Mallika of Kosala died. Deeply grieved, King Pasenadi
came to the Buddha for comfort. The queen had been his closest friend, and he
loved her with all his heart. She was a faithful disciple of the Buddha, a radiant
spirit who understood the deeper reaches of the Dharma. Even before the king
met the Buddha, the queen had shared her understanding of the Way with him.
The king recalled how one night he had a disturbing dream which he feared was
a warning that misfortune would befall him. Placing his faith in the brahmans, he
asked them to sacrifice several animals in order to ask the gods for protection.
The queen dissuaded him from doing so. She had often served as a close advisor
to the king on political matters, helping him find solutions to problems that beset
the country. She was one of the Buddha’s most devoted lay disciples. Because
she loved to study the Dharma, she built a Dharma discussion hall in a park with
many beautiful tinduka trees. She often invited the Buddha and his senior
disciples to give Dharma discourses and lead discussions there. She also opened
the hall to leaders of other religious sects to use.
   Suffering from the loss of his companion for more than forty years, the king
came to the Buddha. As he sat quietly next to the Buddha, he felt peace slowly
return to his heart. He had been following the Buddha’s suggestion to spend
more time meditating. The Buddha reminded him of their previous conversation
in which they discussed the importance of living according to the teaching in
order to create happiness for those around one. The Buddha encouraged the king
to reform the system of justice and economics in the country. He said corporal


punishment, torture, imprisonment, and execution were not effective means for
stopping crime. Crime and violence were the natural result of hunger and
poverty. The best way to assist the people and provide for their security was to
concentrate on building a healthy economy. It was essential to provide food,
seeds, and fertilizer to poor farmers until they could become self-sufficient and
productive. Loans should be provided to small merchants, retirement funds
should be set up for those no longer able to work, and the poor should be
exempted from taxes. All manner of coercion and oppression against manual
laborers must cease. People should be free to select their own jobs. Ample
opportunities for training should be made available to help people master the
trades they chose. The Buddha said that a correct economic policy should be
based on voluntary participation.
   Venerable Ananda was sitting close to the Buddha during this conversation
with the king. He was thus able to preserve the Buddha’s ideas on politics and
economics in the Kutadanta Sutra.
   Late one afternoon Ananda found the Buddha sitting outside the Visakha
Dharma hall. His back was turned to the sun. Ananda found it curious. The
Buddha was usually fond of watching the sun set. He asked the Buddha about it,
and the Buddha replied that he was letting the sun warm his back. Ananda
approached and began to massage the Buddha’s back. He knelt down to massage
his legs as well. As he massaged the Buddha’s legs, he remarked, “Lord, I have
been your attendant for the past fifteen years. I remember how firm your skin
was in the past and how it had such a healthy glow. But now your skin is
wrinkled and your leg muscles have grown soft. Why, I can count all your
bones!”
   The Buddha laughed. “If you live long enough, you grow old, Ananda. But
my eyes and ears are as sharp as ever. Ananda, do you miss Vulture Peak and the
groves at Bamboo Forest? Wouldn’t you like to climb Vulture Peak again and
watch the sun set?”
   “Lord, if you would like to return to Vulture Peak, please let me accompany
you.”
   That summer the Buddha returned to Magadha. He walked leisurely, breaking
the long trek into several short trips. He stopped all along the way to visit sangha
centers. He taught the bhikkhus at each center and delivered talks to the laity. He
passed through the kingdoms of Sakya, Malla, Videha, and Vajji, before he at
last crossed the Ganga into Magadha. Before going on to Rajagaha, he stopped
to visit the sangha center in Nalanda.


   Bamboo Forest and Vulture Peak were as beautiful as ever. People from the
capital and neighboring villages came to see the Buddha in droves. Nearly a
month passed before the Buddha was free to accept Jivaka’s invitation to visit
his Mango Grove. Jivaka had built a new Dharma hall in the grove that was large
enough to seat one thousand bhikkhus.
   While they sat outside his hut at the Mango Grove, the Buddha listened to
Jivaka recount events that had taken place in the Buddha’s absence. Queen
Videhi, he was pleased to learn, had found inner peace. She devoted time to
meditation and had become a vegetarian. King Ajatasattu, on the other hand, was
suffering from extreme mental anguish. He was haunted by his father’s death
and his mind could find no ease. His nerves were constantly on edge, and he was
afraid to sleep at night because of the terrible nightmares he suffered. Many
doctors and high-ranking priests from the sects of Makkhali Gosala, Ajita
Kosakambali, Pakudha Kaccayana, Nigantha Nataputta, and Sanjaya
Belatthiputta, had been summoned to try to cure him. Each priest hoped to effect
a cure so that their particular sect would receive special patronage, but not one of
them was able to help the king.
   One day the king ate dinner with his wife, their son Udayibhadda, and his
mother, the former queen Videhi. Prince Udayibhadda was almost three years
old. Because the king catered to his son’s every whim, the prince was an unruly
and spoiled child. The prince demanded his dog be allowed to sit at the table
with them. Though such a thing was normally forbidden, the king gave in to his
son’s wish. Feeling somewhat embarrassed, he said to his mother, “It is
unpleasant having a dog sitting at the table, isn’t it, but what else can I do?”
   Queen Videhi answered, “You love your son and so you have allowed him to
bring his dog to the table. There is nothing unusual about that. Do you remember
how your own father once swallowed pus from your hand because he loved
you?”
   Ajatasattu did not recall the incident and asked his mother to tell him what had
happened.
   The queen said, “One day your finger became red and swollen. A boil formed
underneath your fingernail. It caused you so much pain, you cried and fretted all
day and night. Your father was unable to sleep out of concern for you. He lifted
you onto his pillow and placed your infected finger in his mouth. He sucked on it
to help relieve the pain. He sucked on your finger throughout four days and
nights until the boil broke. He then sucked out the pus. He did not dare remove
your finger from his mouth to spit out the pus for fear you would feel more pain.


And so he swallowed the pus while continuing to suck on your finger. From this
story, you can see how deeply your father loved you. You love your own son and
that is why you have allowed him to bring his dog to the table. I can understand
that very well.”
   The king suddenly clutched his head in his two hands and ran from the room,
leaving his meal uneaten. After that night, his mental state worsened. At last,
Jivaka was summoned to take a look at the king. Jivaka listened to Ajatasattu
recount all his woes and how no priest or brahman had been able to help him.
Jivaka sat without saying a word. The king asked, “Jivaka, why don’t you say
anything?”
   Jivaka responded, “There is only thing to tell you. Teacher Gautama is the
only person who can help you overcome the agony in your heart. Go to the
Buddha for guidance.”
   The king did not speak for several minutes. Finally he muttered, “But I am
sure Teacher Gautama hates me.”
   Jivaka disagreed. “Don’t say such a thing. Teacher Gautama does not hate
anyone. He was your father’s teacher and closest friend. Going to him will be
like going to your own father. See him and you will find inner peace. You will be
able to restore all you have torn asunder. My ability to heal is not worth anything
compared with the Buddha’s ability to heal. He is not a medical physician but he
is the king of all physicians. Some people call him the Medicine King.”
   The king agreed to think about it.
   The Buddha remained at Vulture Peak for several months. He visited the
sangha centers in the region and also agreed to spend a month at Jivaka’s Mango
Grove. It was there that Jivaka arranged for King Ajatasattu to meet with the
Buddha. On a moonlit night, the king, seated on an elephant, proceeded to the
grove accompanied by the royal family, his concubines, palace guards, and
Queen Videhi. When they entered the grove, all was still. The king was seized
with sudden panic. Jivaka had told him that the Buddha was dwelling in the
grove with a thousand bhikkhus. If that was true, how could it be so quiet?
Could it be a trick? Was Jivaka leading him to be ambushed? He turned to Jivaka
and asked if this was all a plot in order for Jivaka to seek revenge. Jivaka
laughed out loud. He pointed to the Dharma hall from which light was streaming
through a round window.
   Jivaka said, “The Buddha and all the bhikkhus are in there this very moment.”
   The king climbed down from his elephant and entered the hall, followed by
his family and attendants. Jivaka pointed to a man sitting on a platform, his back


supported against a pillar, and said, “There is the Buddha.”
   The king was deeply impressed by the attentive quiet. A thousand bhikkhus
surrounded the Buddha in perfect silence. Not even a robe rustled. King
Ajatasattu had only seen the Buddha a few times in his life, as he had never
joined his father in attending the Buddha’s regular Dharma talks.
   The Buddha invited the king and royal family to be seated. The king bowed
and then spoke, “Lord, I remember hearing you speak at the palace when I was a
young boy. Tonight, I would like to ask you a question. What kinds of fruit does
the spiritual life bear that hundreds, even thousands, abandon their homes to
pursue it?”
   The Buddha asked the king if he had ever asked any other teacher the same
question. The king responded that he had, in fact, asked dozens of other teachers
including Venerable Devadatta, but he had never received a satisfactory answer.
   The Buddha said, “Your majesty, tonight the Tathagata will tell you the fruits
which can be found in this teaching, fruits that can be enjoyed in this very
moment, and fruits which can be reaped in the future. You need not seek lofty
answers. Simply look and see these fruits as clearly as a mango held in your own
hand.
   “Your majesty, consider this example. A servant caters to all his master’s
whims and commands from sunup to sundown, until one day he asks himself,
‘As my master and I are both human beings, why should I allow myself to be
abused by him?’ The servant decides to leave his life as a servant to enter the
homeless life of a bhikkhu. He pursues a chaste, diligent, and mindful life. He
eats but one meal a day, practices sitting and walking meditation, and expresses
calm dignity in all his movements. He becomes a respected, virtuous monk.
Knowing that he was formerly a servant, if you met him, would you call out to
him and say, ‘Here, fellow, I want you to serve me from sunup to sundown.
Obey all my commands.’”
   The king said, “No, Lord, I would not address him in such a way. I would
respectfully greet him. I would make food offerings to him and assure that he
received the full protection of the law afforded to monks.”
   The Buddha said, “Your majesty, that is the first fruit a bhikkhu reaps. He is
liberated from racial, social, and caste prejudice. His human dignity is restored.”
   The king said, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, dignity is only the first fruit. A
bhikkhu observes two hundred fifty precepts which enable him to dwell in calm
peace. People who do not observe precepts are more easily misguided. They may


commit such crimes as lying, drunkenness, sexual misconduct, stealing, and
even murder. They bring cruel punishment on their minds and bodies by acting
this way. They may be arrested and put in jail by the police and government
officials. A bhikkhu observes the precepts of not killing, not stealing, not
engaging in sexual misconduct, not lying, and not using alcohol. In addition, he
observes more than two hundred other precepts which assure him a carefree life
unknown to those who do not observe precepts. Precepts help prevent one from
falling into error, thus assuring a carefree state. That is another fruit of spiritual
practice which can be enjoyed right in the present moment.”
   The king said, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, a bhikkhu owns no more than three
robes and a begging bowl. He has no fear of losing his possessions or being
robbed. He knows he will not be attacked in the night by people who want to
steal his wealth. He is free to sleep alone in the forest beneath a tree, relaxed and
without worries. Freedom from fear is a great happiness. That is another fruit of
spiritual practice which can be enjoyed right in the present moment.”
   The king trembled and he said, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, a bhikkhu lives simply. Though he eats
only one meal a day, his bowl receives offerings from a thousand different
homes. He does not chase after wealth or fame. He uses only what he needs and
remains unattached to desires. Living in such carefree ease is a great happiness.
That is another fruit of spiritual practice which can be enjoyed right in the
present moment.”
   The king said, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, if you knew how to practice full
awareness of breathing and how to meditate, you could experience the happiness
of one who follows the path. It is the happiness that meditation brings. A
bhikkhu observes the six sense organs and overcomes the five obstacles of the
mind which are greed, hatred, ignorance, torpor, and doubt. He uses the full
awareness of breathing to create joy and happiness that nourishes his mind and
body and helps him to make progress on the path of enlightenment. The pleasant
sensations which result from gratifying sense desires are no measure for the joy
and happiness that meditation brings. The joy and happiness of meditation
permeates mind and body, heals all anxiety, sorrow, and despair, and enables the
practitioner to experience the wonders of life. Your majesty, that is one of the
most important fruits of spiritual practice and one which can be enjoyed right in
the present moment.”


   The king said, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, thanks to dwelling diligently in
mindfulness and observing the precepts, the bhikkhu is able to build
concentration which he can use to illuminate all dharmas. Thanks to his
penetrating illumination, he sees the selfless and impermanent nature of all
dharmas. Thanks to seeing the selfless and impermanent nature of all dharmas,
he is no longer entangled by any dharma. He can thus cut through the ropes of
bondage which bind most people—the ropes of greed, hatred, desire, laziness,
doubt, false view of self, extreme views, wrong views, distorted views, and
views advocating unnecessary prohibitions. Cutting through all these ropes, the
bhikkhu attains liberation and true freedom. Your majesty, liberation is a great
happiness and one of the greatest fruits of spiritual practice. There are bhikkhus
sitting here tonight who have attained that fruit. This fruit, your majesty, can be
attained right here in this life.”
   The king exclaimed, “Wonderful, Lord! Please tell me more.”
   The Buddha continued, “Your majesty, thanks to illuminating and seeing
deeply into the nature of all dharmas, a bhikkhu knows that all dharmas are
neither produced nor destroyed, neither defiled nor immaculate, neither
increasing nor decreasing, neither one nor many, neither coming nor going.
Thanks to this understanding, a bhikkhu does not discriminate. He regards all
dharmas with complete equanimity, without fear or worry. He rides the waves of
birth and death in order to save all beings. He shows all beings the Way so they
too can taste liberation, joy, and happiness. Your majesty, being able to help
others free themselves from the maze of desire, hatred, and ignorance is a great
happiness. Such happiness is a sublime fruit of spiritual practice which begins to
be realized in the present and extends to the future. Your majesty, in all of his
contacts, a bhikkhu remembers his responsibility to guide others on the path of
virtue and liberation. Bhikkhus do not engage in partisan politics but they
contribute to building peace, joy, and virtue in society. The fruits of his spiritual
practice are not for the bhikkhu’s sole enjoyment and benefit. They are the
people’s and country’s inheritance.”
   The king stood up and joined his palms in deepest respect. He said, “Most
sublime Teacher! Lord! By the use of simple words, you have shown me the
light. You have helped me see the true value of the Dharma. Lord, you have
rebuilt that which was in ruins, revealed that which was concealed, shown the
way to one who was lost, and brought light into the darkness. Please, Lord,
accept me as your disciple, as you accepted my parents in the past.”


   The king prostrated himself before the Buddha.
   The Buddha nodded his acceptance. He asked Venerable Sariputta to teach the
three refuges to the king and queen. After they recited them, the king said, “As it
is late, please allow us to return to the palace. I have an early morning audience.”
   The Buddha nodded again.
   The encounter between the Buddha and King Ajatasattu benefited all those
present. The king’s mental torment rapidly improved. That same night he
dreamed he saw his father smiling at him, and he felt that all that had been torn
asunder was now made whole again. The king’s heart was transformed, bringing
great joy to all his people.
   After that, the king visited the Buddha often on his own. He no longer came
on an elephant accompanied by royal guards. He climbed the stone steps carved
into the mountain just as his father, King Bimbisara, had done so often in the
past. In his private meetings with the Buddha, King Ajatasattu was able to reveal
his heart and confess his past crimes. The Buddha treated him as though he were
his own son. He counselled the king to surround himself with men of virtue.
   At the end of the retreat season, Jivaka asked the Buddha to allow him to enter
the homeless life as a bhikkhu. The Buddha accepted him, and gave him the
Dharma name of Vimala Kondanna. Bhikkhu Vimala Kondanna was permitted
to continue to stay at the Mango Grove. There were about two hundred bhikkhus
already in residence there. This was the place at which the Buddha was cared for
following the accident on Vulture Peak. With so many mature mango trees, the
Mango Grove monastery was a very pleasant place to stay. Bhikkhu Vimala
Kondanna continued to grow medicinal herbs for the community of bhikkhus.


                        Chapter Seventy-Seven
                              Stars in Your Eyes
   W hen the retreat season ended, the Buddha and Ananda traveled throughout
Magadha. They stopped in many out-of-the-way places and at every local
Dharma center, so the Buddha could offer teaching to both the bhikkhus and the
laity. The Buddha frequently pointed out beautiful scenery to Venerable Ananda.
The Buddha knew that because Ananda devoted such wholehearted attention to
attending to the Buddha’s needs, he sometimes forgot to enjoy the countryside
around them.
   Ananda had served as the Buddha’s attendant for nearly twenty years.
Thinking back over the years, he recalled how often the Buddha pointed to the
landscape and exclaimed such things as, “Look how beautiful Vulture Peak is,
Ananda!” or “Ananda, look how beautiful the plains of Saptapanni are!” Ananda
fondly remembered the day the Buddha pointed to golden rice fields bordered by
green grasses and suggested they use the same pattern to sew the bhikkhus’
robes. Ananda saw that the Buddha knew how to truly enjoy beautiful things
while never becoming caught by either the beautiful or ugly.
   The following rainy season, the Buddha returned to Jetavana. Because King
Pasenadi was on a journey, he did not see the Buddha until the retreat was half-
over. Immediately after his arrival, he visited the Buddha and told him that he no
longer liked to be confined to the palace. Now that he was advanced in years, he
had delegated many of his royal tasks to trusted ministers so that he could travel
with a small party. He wanted to see and enjoy the land of his own country and
that of neighboring kingdoms. When he visited another country, he never
expected a formal reception. He came as a simple pilgrim. His trips were also
occasions to practice walking meditation. Leaving behind all thoughts and
worries, he took leisurely steps while enjoying the countryside. He told the
Buddha how much these trips refreshed his heart.
   “Lord Buddha, I am seventy-eight years old, the same as you. I know that you
also enjoy walking in beautiful places. But I’m afraid my travels do not serve
others in the way your travels do. Wherever you go, you stop to teach and guide
the people. You are like a shining light wherever you go.”


   The king confided to the Buddha a secret pain he carried in his heart. Seven
years earlier when an attempted coup took place in the capital, he wrongly
accused the commander-in-chief of the royal forces, General Bandhula, and had
him executed. A few years later he learned that the general had not been
involved. The king was overcome with regret. He did all he could to restore the
general’s good name and provided ample assistance to his widow. He also
appointed the general’s nephew, General Karayana, as the new commander-in-
chief of the royal forces.
   During the remainder of the retreat season, the king visited Jetavana every
other day to attend Dharma talks and discussions, and sometimes simply to sit
quietly by the Buddha’s side. When the retreat season came to a close, the
Buddha began traveling. The king, too, set out on another trip with a small
traveling party.
   The following year, the Buddha spent two weeks in Kuru after the retreat
season. Then he followed the river down to Kosali, Varanasi, and Vesali before
returning north.
   One day while staying in Medalumpa, a small district in Sakya, the Buddha
received an unexpected visit from King Pasenadi. It so happened that the king
was traveling in the same region with Prince Vedudabha and General Karayana.
The king learned from some local people that the Buddha was staying not far
away in Medalumpa. As it was only a half day’s journey from where the king
was, he instructed General Karayana to drive their carriage there. There were
three other carriages in their party. They left their carriages outside the park
where the Buddha was dwelling, and the king and the general entered the park
together. The king asked a bhikkhu where to find the Buddha’s hut and the
bhikkhu pointed to a small hut beneath a shady tree.
   The door to the hut was closed. The king walked leisurely to the hut and
before knocking cleared his throat. He removed his sword and crown and handed
them to the general, requesting the general to take them back to the carriage and
wait for him there. The door to the Buddha’s hut opened. He was most happy to
see the king and invited him in at once. Venerables Sariputta and Ananda were
also there. They stood to greet the king.
   The Buddha asked the king to be seated on the chair next to his own. Sariputta
and Ananda stood behind the Buddha. To their surprise the king stood up again
and then knelt down and kissed the Buddha’s feet. Several times he said, “Lord,
I am King Pasenadi of the kingdom of Kosala. I respectfully pay you homage.”
   The Buddha assisted the king back onto his chair and asked, “Your majesty,


we are old, close friends. Why do you pay me such formal respects today?”
   The king answered, “Lord, I am old. There are a number of things I wish to
say to you before it is too late.”
   The Buddha regarded him kindly and said, “Please speak.”
   “Lord, I have total faith in you, the Enlightened One. I have total faith in the
Dharma and in the Sangha. I have known many brahmans and practitioners of
other sects. I have watched so many of them practice in an upright manner for
ten, twenty, thirty, or even forty years, only to finally abandon their practice to
return to a life of indulgence. But among your bhikkhus, I do not see anyone
abandoning his practice.
   “Lord, I have seen kings oppose other kings, generals plot against other
generals, brahmans compete with other brahmans, wives berate husbands,
children accuse their parents, brothers argue with brothers, and friends fight with
friends. But I see the bhikkhus living in harmony, joy, and mutual respect. They
live together like milk and water. Nowhere else have I witnessed such harmony.
   “Lord, wherever I go, I see spiritual practitioners whose faces are lined with
worry, anxiety, and hardship. But your bhikkhus look refreshed and happy,
relaxed and carefree. Lord, all these things strengthen my faith in you and your
teaching.
   “Lord, I am a king from the warrior caste. It is within my power to order
anyone’s death or to condemn anyone to prison. Even so, during councils with
my ministers, I am often interrupted. But in your sangha, even when a thousand
bhikkhus are gathered, there is never so much as a murmur or the rustling of a
single robe to disturb your speaking. That is marvelous, Lord. You do not need
to wield a sword or threaten others with punishment to be paid absolute respect.
Lord, this strengthens my faith in you and your teaching.
   “Lord, I have watched famous scholars scheme together to come up with
questions that will confound you. But when they meet with you and hear you
expound the Pharma, their mouths fall open and they forget their useless
questions. They express nothing but admiration for you. Lord, this also
strengthens my faith in you and your teaching.
   “Lord, there are two highly skilled horsemen named Isidatta and Purana who
work in the palace. They receive their wages from me, but the respect they hold
for me is nothing compared to the respect they hold for you. I once took them
with me on one of my travels. We were caught in a storm one night and had to
seek shelter in a tiny palm-leaf hut. For most of the night, the horsemen spoke
about your teaching. When they finally went to sleep, they slept with their heads


in the direction of Vulture Peak and their feet pointing to me! You don’t give
them any wages, Lord, but they regard you far more highly than they do me.
This also strengthens my faith in you and your teaching.
   “Lord, you came from the same warrior caste as me. We are both seventy-
eight years old this year. I wanted to take this occasion to express my gratitude
for the deep friendship we have shared. With your permission, I will now take
my leave.”
   “Please, your majesty,” said the Buddha, “take good care of your health.”
   He walked with the king to the door. When the Buddha turned back to Ananda
and Sariputta, he saw them standing silently with their palms joined. He said,
“Sariputta and Ananda, King Pasenadi has just expressed his innermost
sentiments about the three gems. Please share these things with others to help
them strengthen their own faith.”
   The next month, the Buddha returned south to Vulture Peak. Upon his arrival
he received two sad announcements. King Pasenadi had died under disturbing
circumstances, and Venerable Moggallana had been murdered by hostile ascetics
just outside Bamboo Forest.
   King Pasenadi did not die peacefully in his palace in Savatthi. He died in
Rajagaha in circumstances hardly befitting a king. After visiting the Buddha that
day in Medalumpa, the king walked back to his carriage. He was surprised to
find only one carriage instead of the four he had left there. His attendant
informed him that General Karayana had forced the others to return to Savatthi.
The general still held the king’s crown and sword. He told Prince Vidudabha to
return at once to Savatthi and claim the throne as his own. The general said King
Pasenadi was too old and weak to reign any longer. The prince was unwilling,
but when General Karayana threatened to usurp the throne himself, the prince
felt he had no choice but to obey the general’s wishes.
   King Pasenadi headed straight to Rajagaha intending to ask his nephew and
son-in-law, King Ajatasattu, for assistance. The king was too upset to eat
anything along the way and only drank a small amount of water. When they
reached Rajagaha it was too late to disturb the palace. The king and his attendant
checked into a local inn. That night the king fell suddenly ill and died in his
attendant’s arms before help could be sought. The attendant sobbed inconsolably
over his king’s sorry fate. When King Ajatasattu learned what had happened in
the morning, he sent for King Pasenadi’s body and ordered a solemn and
majestic funeral be organized. When the funeral was over, he wanted to send
soldiers to topple King Vidudabha, but he was discouraged by Bhikkhu Vimala


Kondanna, formerly the physician Jivaka, who said that as King Pasenadi had
already passed away and the new king was a rightful heir, there was no point in
starting a war. Heeding this counsel, King Ajatasattu sent an envoy to Savatthi to
express his recognition of the new king.
   Venerable Moggallana was one of the Buddha’s finest senior disciples,
ranking with Sariputta and Kondanna. Many senior disciples had already passed
away, including Kondanna, who had been among the Buddha’s first five
disciples. The Kassapa brothers had all died, and so had Abbess Mahapajapati.
Bhikkhu Rahula had died at the age of fifty-one, shortly after his mother,
Bhikkhuni Yasodhara died.
   Venerable Moggallana was known for his fearless, upright character. He
always spoke the truth directly and without compromise. Because of that, he had
earned the hatred of others outside the sangha. The day of his death, he set out,
accompanied by two disciples, quite early in the morning. Assassins were hiding
just outside the monastery, waiting for him. When he appeared, they rushed out
and began to beat him and the other two bhikkhus with large sticks. The
bhikkhus were outnumbered and unable to defend themselves from the blows.
Moggallana’s two disciples were beaten and left by the side of the road. They
cried out for help but it was too late. Venerable Moggallana let forth a cry that
shook the forest. When other bhikkhus ran out of the monastery, Moggallana
was dead and the assassins had disappeared.
   Venerable Moggallana’s body had already been cremated by the time the
Buddha returned to Vulture Peak. An urn with his ashes had been placed just
outside the Buddha’s hut. The Buddha asked about Venerable Sariputta and was
told that since Moggallana’s murder, he had remained in his hut with the door
closed. Sariputta and Moggallana had been like brothers, as close as a form and
its shadow. The Buddha had not yet stopped to rest after his travels, but he
proceeded at once to Sariputta’s hut to console him.
   As they walked to Sariputta’s hut, Ananda reflected on how sad the Buddha
must feel. How could he avoid feeling heartbroken when two of his closest
friends had just died? The Buddha would console Sariputta, but who would
console the Buddha? As if to answer Ananda’s hidden thoughts, the Buddha
stopped, looked at him, and said, “Ananda, everyone commends you for
studying hard and possessing a phenomenal memory, but don’t think that is
enough. It is important to look after the Tathagata and the sangha, but it is not
sufficient. Whatever time remains you, devote your efforts to breaking through
birth and death. Learn to look at birth and death as mere illusions, like the stars


one sees in one’s eyes after rubbing them.”
  Venerable Ananda bowed his head and continued walking in silence.
  The next day, the Buddha suggested a stupa be built for the Venerable
Moggallana’s relics.


                           Chapter Seventy-Eight
                         Two Thousand Saffron Robes
One afternoon as the Buddha was doing walking meditation along the mountain
slope, two bhikkhus arrived carrying Venerable Devadatta on a stretcher.
Venerable Devadatta’s health had been poor for several years, and now, on the
point of death, he wished to see the Buddha. He had only six remaining
disciples, having lost even his most fervent supporters years earlier. His closest
associate, Venerable Kokalika, died years before of an unusual skin disease.
During Devadatta’s final years at Gayasisa, he had much time alone to examine
his actions.
   When the Buddha was informed that Venerable Devadatta wished to see him,
he returned to his hut at once in order to receive him. Venerable Devadatta was
too weak to sit up. He had barely enough strength to speak. He looked at the
Buddha and with great pain, joined his palms and spoke the words, “I take
refuge in the Buddha.” The Buddha gently placed his hand on Devadatta’s
forehead. That evening Venerable Devadatta died.
   It was Summer and the skies were clear and blue. The Buddha was preparing
to depart on a journey, when a messenger from King Ajatasattu arrived. It was
Vassakara, the king’s minister of foreign affairs. He had been asked by the king
to inform the Buddha about the king’s intentions to send his army to conquer
Vajji, a country which lay north of the Ganga. Before carrying out his attack, the
king wanted to ask what the Buddha thought of his plans.
   Venerable Ananda was also present, standing behind the Buddha and fanning
him. The Buddha turned to Ananda and asked, “Venerable Ananda, have you
heard whether or not the people of Vajji still regularly gather together in large
numbers to discuss politics?”
   Ananda answered, “Lord, I have heard that the people of Vajji often assemble
in large numbers to discuss the political situation.”
   “Then Vajji still prospers, Ananda. And tell me, do you know whether or not
they still display a spirit of cooperation and unity during their meetings?”
   “Lord, I have heard they enjoy great cooperation and unity.”
   “Well then, Vajji still prospers. Ananda, do the people of Vajji still respect and


follow the laws that have been enacted in their country?”
   “Lord, I have heard that they respect and follow all their laws.”
   “Then it is certain Vajji still prospers. Ananda, do the people of Vajji respect
and listen to worthy leaders?”
   “Lord, I have heard that the people of Vajji respect and listen to worthy
leaders.”
   “Then it is certain their country still prospers. Ananda, have you heard
whether or not there is rape and other violent crime in Vajji?”
   “Lord, there is almost no rape or other violent crime in their country.”
   “Then Vajji continues to prosper. Ananda, have you heard whether or not the
people of Vajji still protect and maintain the shrines of their ancestors?”
   “Lord, it is said that they protect and maintain the shrines of their ancestors.”
   “Then Vajji still prospers. Have you heard whether or not the people of Vajji
respect, make offerings to, and study with spiritual teachers who have attained
the Way?”
   “Lord, they continue to respect, make offerings to, and study with spiritual
teachers who have attained the Way.”
   “Ananda, it is then certain that Vajji still prospers. Ananda, some time ago the
Tathagata had the opportunity to speak with Vajji’s leaders about the seven
practices which make a country prosper. They are called the Seven Practices of
No-Regression. They include: gathering together for discussion, cooperation and
unity, respecting laws that have been enacted, respecting and following worthy
leaders, refraining from rape and other violent crimes, protecting the ancestral
shrines, and respecting teachers who have attained the Way. As the people of
Vajji continue to observe these seven practices, it is certain that their country still
prospers. Because of that, the Tathagata believes it would be impossible for
Magadha to defeat Vajji.”
   Minister Vassakara spoke, “Lord, if the people of Vajji observed only one of
those seven practices, their country would prosper. Lord, I do not think King
Ajatasattu can win a war with Vajji with power and weapons alone. He could
only succeed if he sowed seeds of discord among Vajji’s leaders. Thank you,
Lord, for your counsel. I will return now to my duties.”
   After Vassakara departed, the Buddha turned to Ananda and said, “Vassakara
knows how to scheme. The Tathagata fears that in the future, King Ajatasattu
will indeed send his army to fight Vajji.”
   That afternoon, the Buddha asked Venerable Ananda to invite all the bhikkhus
and bhikkhunis currently in Rajagaha to assemble at Vulture Peak. When, after


seven days, they were all gathered, they numbered two thousand. It was a
splendid sight to see so many saffron robes against the mountain.
   The Buddha walked slowly from his hut down to the Dharma platform where
the monks and nuns were gathered. He stepped up onto the platform, looked out
over the community, smiled and said, “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, the Tathagata
will teach you the Seven Methods to prevent the teaching and sangha from
falling into decline. Listen!
   “First, meet frequently in groups to study and discuss the Dharma. Second,
always gather and disperse in a spirit of cooperation and unity. Third, respect and
follow the precepts which have been enacted. Fourth, respect and follow the
guidance of elders in the sangha who possess virtue and experience. Fifth, live a
pure and simple life, unswayed by desire and greed. Sixth, cherish a calm and
peaceful life. Seventh, dwell in mindfulness in order to realize peace, joy, and
liberation, and to become a refuge and support to friends along the path.
   “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, if you live by these seven practices, the Dharma
will flourish and the sangha cannot fall into decline. Nothing outside will be able
to disturb the sangha. Only division and discord from within can cause the
sangha to break. Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, when a lion king dies in the
mountain forest, no animals dare eat its flesh. Only the worms in its own body
devour it from within. Protect the Dharma by living according to these seven
practices. Never become as worms which devour a lion’s corpse from within.”
   The Buddha also counselled the monks and nuns to avoid wasting precious
time by engaging in idle conversation, oversleeping, pursuing fame and
recognition, chasing after desires, spending time with people of poor character,
and being satisfied with only a shallow understanding of the teaching. He
reminded them of the Seven Factors of Awakening as the path every bhikkhu
and bhikkhuni should travel—mindful—ness, investigating dharmas, energy, joy,
ease, concentration, and letting go. He also repeated the teachings on
impermanence, emptiness of self, non-attachment, liberation, and overcoming
desire and greed.
   The two thousand monks and nuns remained on Vulture Peak for ten days.
They slept beneath trees, in caves and huts, or by mountain streams. The Buddha
gave them a Dharma talk every day. On the tenth and final day, the Buddha told
them they could return to their own centers.
   After the bhikkhus and bhikkhunis departed, the Buddha turned to Venerable
Ananda and said, “We will visit Bamboo Forest tomorrow.”
   After visiting Bamboo Forest, the Buddha and Ananda left Rajagaha and


headed towards Ambalatthika, the refreshing park set aside long ago by King
Bimbisara for followers of the Way. The bhikkhus often rested there on their
way to Nalanda. Venerable Sariputta had once dwelled there with Rahula. The
Buddha visited and instructed the bhikkhus living in Ambalatthika. He spoke
about Precepts, Concentration, and Understanding.
    The Buddha proceeded to Nalanda accompanied by a hundred bhikkhus.
Venerables Ananda, Sariputta, and Anuruddha walked close by his side. When
they reached Nalanda, the Buddha rested in Pavarika’s mango grove.
    The next morning, Venerable Sariputta sat for a long quiet moment by the
Buddha’s side. Finally, he said, “Lord, I am sure that in the past, present, or
future, there is no spiritual teacher whose wisdom and attainment surpasses
yours.”
    The Buddha said, “Sariputta, those words are as bold as a lion’s roar. Have
you met all the spiritual teachers in the past, present, and future that you dare
make such a statement?”
    “Lord, I have not met all the masters of the three realms, but there is one thing
I know for certain. I have lived close by you for more than forty-five years. I
have heard your teaching and I have observed the way you live. I know that you
dwell constantly in awareness. You are a perfect master of your six senses. You
never show any sign of the five obstacles of greed and desire, anger and hatred,
forgetfulness, agitation, doubt, or suspicion. While there may be masters in the
past, present, and future who attain to the same wisdom and awakening, I do not
think anyone could surpass your understanding.”
    In Nalanda, the Buddha taught the bhikkhus more concerning Precepts,
Concentration, and Understanding. He then returned to Pataligama where he was
welcomed by crowds of bhikkhus and lay disciples. He was offered food and
water, after which he delivered a Dharma talk.
    The next morning, Venerable Sariputta received news that his mother was
very ill. She was more than one hundred years old. He requested permission to
go visit her. The Buddha saw Venerable Sariputta off. Sariputta bowed to him
three times and then departed for Nala with the novice Cunda.
    As the Buddha and bhikkhus passed through the city gates of Pataligama, they
were met by two officials from Magadha, Sunidha and Vassakara. They had been
assigned by King Ajatasattu to transform Pataligama into a major city. They told
the Buddha, “We plan to rename the city gate you have just passed through
‘Gautama Gate.’ Allow us to accompany you to the ferry landing. We will name
it ‘Gautama Ferry Landing.’”


   The Ganga was so swollen from recent rains that the crows could stand on the
high upper banks and dip their beaks in the water for a drink. Five rafts carried
the Buddha and his bhikkhus across the river. Venerable Ananda stood by the
Buddha’s side. They looked out over the water towards Vesali on the opposite
shore.
   Ananda remembered the time twenty-five years earlier when the Buddha had
been greeted by vast throngs of people on that shore. At that time, Vesali was
almost destroyed by a plague. Young and old alike died in droves. There was
nothing even the best physicians in Vesali could do. Altars were set up, but even
ceaseless prayers did nothing to alter the situation. Finally the people’s thoughts
turned towards the Buddha. Governor Tomara traveled to Rajagaha and
beseeched the Buddha to come to Vesali in hopes that his virtuous presence
would turn the tragic tide. The Buddha agreed to go. King Bimbisara and his
queen, palace officials, and the citizens of Rajagaha saw the Buddha off.
When the Buddha reached Vesali by boat, he found the shore crowded with
altars, flags, and flowers to welcome him.


   When the Buddha reached Vesali by boat, he found the shore crowded with
altars, flags, and flowers to welcome him as though he were a savior. The
people’s cheers shook the air. Venerable Vimala Kondanna, the former Jivaka,
and several senior disciples accompanied the Buddha. No sooner did the
Buddha’s foot touch the shore than thunder shook the sky, and it began to rain. It
was the first rain after a long drought, and it brought cool relief and new hope.
The Buddha and his bhikkhus were led to a park in the center of Kotigama.
There the Buddha spoke about the Three Treasures. A few days later, the Buddha
and his bhikkhus were invited to Vesali. They dwelled at Kutagara Monastery in
Mahavana during their stay. Thanks to the Buddha’s merit and Vimala


Kondanna’s skills, the spread of the plague was slowed until, at last, it
disappeared. The Buddha remained in Vesali for six months.
   Ananda’s thoughts returned to the present as they reached the shore. The
Buddha walked to Kotigama, where he was met by a large number of monks. He
spoke about the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, and about Precepts,
Concentration, and Understanding. After spending several days in Kotigama, the
Buddha headed for Nadika. There he and his bhikkhus slept in a brick house
called Ginjakavasatha.
   In Nadika, the Buddha thought about the many disciples who had passed away
in that same region. He thought of his sister Bhikkhuni Sundari Nanda, Bhikkhus
Salha and Nadika, lay disciple Sujata who had so long ago offered him milk, and
lay disciples Kakudha, Bhadda, and Subhadda. At least fifty bhikkhus in the
region had attained to the fruits of Stream Enterer, Once Returner, and Never
Returner. Bhikkhuni Nanda had attained the fruit of Returning Once More.
Bhikkhus Salha and Nadika had attained Arhatship.
   The Buddha taught his disciples that whoever has faith in the Buddha,
Dharma, and Sangha need only look into his or her own heart to know whether
he or she had entered the stream of liberation. There was no need to ask anyone
else. In Nadika, the Buddha taught the bhikkhus concerning Precepts,
Concentration, and Understanding. He walked to Vesali where he rested in
Ambapali’s Mango Grove. There he spoke on contemplating the body, feelings,
mind, and objects of mind.
   When Ambapali heard that the Buddha was dwelling in the Mango Grove, she
came at once to visit him. She invited him and the bhikkhus for a meal offering.
After the meal, she asked to be ordained as a bhikkhuni, and she was accepted
into the sangha of nuns.
   The Buddha spoke more about Precepts, Concentration, and Understanding
during his stay in Vesali. Afterwards, he visited Beluvagamaka village. As the
rainy season was already underway, he decided to spend it there. It was the forty-
fifth retreat season since the Buddha attained Awakening. He asked monks and
nuns in the region to stay at Dharma centers in Vesali or in the homes of friends
and relatives for the duration of the retreat.
   Halfway into the retreat season, the Buddha fell gravely ill. Though he was in
extreme pain, he did not utter any sound. Lying down, he continued to mindfully
follow his breath. At first, his disciples feared he would not survive his illness,
but to their joy, he slowly regained his strength. After many days, he was able to
sit on a chair outside his hut.


                          Chapter Seventy-Nine
                       Sandalwood Tree Mushrooms
Venerable Ananda sat down next to the Buddha and spoke in a soft voice, “I
never saw you so sick in all the years we have been together. I felt paralyzed. I
couldn’t think clearly or carry out my duties. The others did not think you would
pull through, but I said to myself, the Lord Buddha has not yet given us his last
testament. Surely he cannot enter nirvana yet. That thought kept me from the
brink of despair.”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, what else can you and the sangha expect from
me? I have taught the Dharma fully and deeply. Do you think I have concealed
anything from the bhikkhus? Ananda, the teaching is the true refuge. Every
person must make the teaching his own refuge. Live according to the teaching.
Every person should be a lamp unto himself. Ananda, the Buddha, Dharma, and
Sangha are present in everyone. The capacity for enlightenment is the Buddha,
the teaching is the Dharma, the community of support is the Sangha. No one can
take away the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha within you. Though heaven and
earth may crumble, the Three Gems will remain intact within every person. They
are the true refuge. When a bhikkhu dwells in mindfulness and contemplates his
body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind, he is like an island unto himself. He
possesses the truest refuge of all. No person, not even a great Master, can ever be
a more stable refuge than your own island of mindfulness, the Three Gems
within you.”
   By the end of the retreat, the Buddha’s health was greatly restored.
   One morning, novice Cunda who was Venerable Sariputta’s attendant, came
seeking Ananda. He informed Ananda that Sariputta had just died in Nala. He
handed Ananda Venerable Sariputta’s robe, begging bowl, and urn of ashes. He
then covered his face and burst into tears. Venerable Ananda wept too. Cunda
explained that after Sariputta returned to Nala, he cared for his mother until her
death. After her cremation ceremony, he assembled his relatives and all the
villagers, and gave them a teaching concerning the Dharma. He gave them the
three refuges and showed them how to follow the practice. He then sat in a lotus
position and passed into nirvana. Shortly before this, he told Cunda that he


wanted his robe, bowl, and ashes carried back to the Buddha. He also wanted
Cunda to ask the Buddha to allow Cunda to remain by the Buddha’s side.
Venerable Sariputta told Cunda that he wished to pass away before the Buddha
did.
   Venerable Ananda wiped away his tears and went with Cunda to find the
Buddha. The Buddha gazed quietly at the robe, bowl, and ashes of his greatest
disciple. He did not say anything. Then he looked up and gently patted Cunda’s
head.
   Venerable Ananda said, “Lord Buddha, when I heard that our brother
Sariputta was dead, I felt paralyzed. My eyes and mind grew hazy. I am deeply
grieved.”
   The Buddha looked at Ananda and said, “Ananda, did your brother take away
your precepts, concentration, understanding, and liberation when he died?”
   Ananda quietly answered, “That is not the reason for my sadness, Lord. When
brother Sariputta was alive, he lived the teaching with his whole being. He
taught, guided, and encouraged the rest of us. With brothers Sariputta and
Moggallana gone, the sangha feels empty. How could we not feel sad?”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, so many times I have reminded you that with
birth there is death. That which comes together must separate. All dharmas are
impermanent. We should not become attached to them. You must transcend the
world of birth and death, arising and dissolving. Ananda, Sariputta was a great
branch that fulfilled his duty in helping nourish the tree. That branch is still
present in the tree. The tree is the community of bhikkhus practicing the teaching
of enlightenment. If you but open your eyes and look, you will see Sariputta in
yourself, in the Tathagata, in the community of bhikkhus, in all the people
Sariputta taught, in novice Cunda, and along every path Sariputta traveled to
spread the teaching. Open your eyes, Ananda, and you will see Sariputta
everywhere. Don’t think Sariputta is no longer with us. He is here and will
always be.
   “Ananda, Sariputta was a bodhisattva, an enlightened person who used his
Understanding and Love to guide other beings to the shore of enlightenment.
Among the bhikkhus, Sariputta earned praise for his great wisdom. He will be
remembered by future generations as a bodhisattva of great understanding.
Ananda, among the bhikkhus, there are many bodhisattvas who, like Sariputta,
have taken the Great Vow. Bhikkhu Punna, Bhikkhuni Yasodhara, lay disciple
Sudatta are bodhisattvas of great compassion who lived the vow to help all
beings, never afraid of suffering or hardship. Bhikkhuni Yasodhara and disciple


Sudatta have passed away, but Venerable Punna continues to work courageously
and energetically to serve all beings. The Tathagata thinks of Venerable
Moggallana and knows he was a bodhisattva of great courage and energy. Few
can compare with him. Venerable Mahakassapa with his simple, humble life, is a
bodhisattva of simple living. Venerable Anuruddha is a bodhisattva of great
effort and diligence.
   “Ananda, if future generations continue to study and practice the path of
liberation, bodhisattvas will continue to appear in this world. Ananda, faith in
the Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha is faith in the future of the community. In the
future there will be other bodhisattvas as great as Sariputta, Moggallana, Punna,
Anuruddha, Yasodhara, and Anathapindika. Ananda, do not grieve over brother
Sariputta’s death.”
   That noon along the banks of the Ganga, near Ukkhacela hamlet, the Buddha
serenely announced Venerable Sariputta’s death. He urged the bhikkhus to
devote all their efforts to become more like Sariputta, who took the Great Vow to
help all other beings. He said, “Bhikkhus, you should take refuge in yourself and
be an island unto yourself. Do not rely on anything else, and you will not be
drowned by the waves of sorrow and despair. You should take refuge in the
Dharma and take the Dharma as the island.”
   One morning, the Buddha and Ananda entered Vesali to beg. They took their
food and ate it in a nearby forest. After that, the Buddha said, “Ananda, we
should return to Capala temple to rest this afternoon.”
   Along the way to Capala temple, the Buddha stopped several times to admire
the landscape. He said, “Ananda, Vesali is so beautiful. Udena temple is so
lovely. All the temples such as Gotamaka, Sattanbaka, and Bahuputta are
beautiful. The temple in Capala where we will soon rest is also a very pleasant
place.”
   After making a place for the Buddha to rest, Venerable Ananda went outside
to practice walking meditation. While he was walking, the earth suddenly
quaked beneath his feet. He felt both his mind and body shaken. He quickly
returned to the temple and found the Buddha sitting there peacefully. Ananda
told him of the tremor he had just felt.
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, the Tathagata has made his decision. In three
months, I will pass away.”
   Venerable Ananda felt his arms and legs go numb. His eyes blurred and his
head spun. He knelt before the Buddha and begged him, “Please, Lord, do not
die so soon. Please have pity on all your disciples.”


   The Buddha did not answer. Ananda repeated his words three times. The
Buddha then said, “Ananda, if you have faith in the Tathagata, you will know
that my decisions are timely. I have said I will pass away in three months.
Ananda, invite all the bhikkhus in this region to gather at Kutagara Dharma hall
in Great Forest.”
   Seven days later, one thousand five hundred bhikkhus and bhikkhunis
gathered in Kutagara Dharma hall. The Buddha sat on the Dharma platform. He
looked out over the community and said, “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis! All that
the Tathagata has transmitted to you, you must carefully and skillfully study,
observe, practice, and verify for yourselves in order to transmit it to future
generations. Living and practicing the Way should continue to assure the peace,
joy, and happiness of all beings.
   “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, the essence of the Tathagata’s teaching can be
found in the Four Establishments of Mindfulness, the Four Right Efforts, the
Four Bases of Spiritual Strength, the Five Faculties, the Five Powers, the Seven
Factors of Awakening, and the Noble Eightfold Path. Study, practice, realize, and
transmit these teachings.
   “Bhikkhus and Bhikkhunis, all dharmas are impermanent. They are born and
die, they arise and dissolve. Make great efforts to attain liberation. In three
months, the Tathagata will pass away.”
   One thousand five hundred monks and nuns silently listened to the Buddha
and absorbed his direct teaching. They understood this would be their last
chance to see and hear the Buddha give a Dharma talk. Knowing that the
Buddha would pass away soon, everyone felt anguish.
   The next morning, the Buddha went into Vesali to beg, and then he ate in the
forest. Afterwards, he and several bhikkhus departed from Vesali. Looking back
at the city with the eyes of an elephant queen, the Buddha said to Venerable
Ananda, “Ananda, Vesali is so beautiful. This is the last time the Tathagata will
look upon it.” The Buddha then turned around. Looking straight ahead, he said,
“Let us head towards Bhandagama.”
   That afternoon, the Buddha offered Dharma teaching to three hundred
bhikkhus in Bhandagama about Precepts, Concentration, Understanding, and
Liberation. After several days of rest there, the Buddha proceeded on to
Matthigama, Ambagama, and Jambugama. He instructed the bhikkhus in all
these places. They next traveled to Bhoganagara where the Buddha rested in
Ananda temple. Many bhikkhus in the region came to receive his teaching. He
told the bhikkhus how necessary it was to verify the teaching for themselves.


   “Whenever someone speaks about the teaching, even if he claims that it
comes directly from recognized authorities, do not be hasty to accept his words
as the Tathagata’s authentic teaching. Compare what he says to the sutras and
precepts. If it contradicts the sutras and precepts, discard what he says. But if his
words are in accord with the sutras and precepts, accept and practice what he
says.”
   The Buddha went on to Pava, where he rested in the mango grove that
belonged to a lay disciple named Cunda, a blacksmith’s son. Cunda invited the
Buddha and the nearly three hundred bhikkhus traveling with him to take a meal
in his home. Cunda’s wife and friends served all the bhikkhus, while Cunda
personally served the Buddha a special dish he had prepared. It was a dish of
mushrooms picked from a sandalwood tree and was called sukara maddava.
   When he had finished eating, the Buddha told Cunda, “Dear Cunda, please
bury whatever remains of the mushrooms and do not allow anyone else to eat
them.”
   When everyone was finished eating, the Buddha gave a Dharma talk. Then he
and the bhikkhus rested in the mango grove. That night, the Buddha was seized
with violent stomach cramps. He was unable to sleep all night. In the morning,
he took to the road with the bhikkhus, and headed towards Kusinara. All along
the way, his stomach cramps worsened until he was forced to stop and rest
beneath a tree. Venerable Ananda folded the Buddha’s extra sanghati and placed
it beneath the tree for the Buddha to rest upon. The Buddha asked Ananda to
fetch some water for him to ease his thirst.
   Ananda said, “Lord, the stream here is filled with muddy water because a
caravan of cattle carts recently passed by. Please wait until we reach Kakuttha.
The water there will be clear and sweet. I will fetch you water there for both
washing and drinking.”
   But the Buddha said, “Ananda, I am too thirsty. Please get me some water
here.”
   Ananda did as he was told. To his surprise, when he scooped up the muddy
water into a jug, it turned perfectly clear. After he drank the water, the Buddha
lay down to rest. Venerables Anuruddha and Ananda sat close by. The other
bhikkhus sat in a circle around the Buddha.
   At that very moment, a man from Kusinara happened to walk by. When he
saw the Buddha and the bhikkhus, he bowed down low. He introduced himself
as Pukkusa, a member of the Malla clan. He had once been a disciple of Master
Alara Kalama, the same teacher the young Siddhartha had studied with. Pukkusa


had heard a great deal about the Buddha. He bowed again and then offered the
Buddha two new robes. The Buddha accepted one and then asked Pukkusa to
offer the other robe to Venerable Ananda. Pukkusa asked to be accepted as a
disciple. The Buddha spoke to him of the teaching and gave him the refuges.
Overjoyed, Pukkusa thanked the Buddha and then took his leave.
   The Buddha’s robe was travel-worn and stained, and so Ananda helped him
change into the new robe. Then the Buddha stood up and, together with the
bhikkhus, continued to walk toward Kusinara. When they reached the banks of
the Kakuttha River, the Buddha bathed and drank more water. Then he headed
for a nearby mango grove. He asked Bhikkhu Cundaka to fold his extra robe and
place it on the ground for him to lie upon.
   The Buddha called Venerable Ananda and said, “Ananda, the meal we ate at
lay disciple Cunda’s home was the Tathagata’s last meal. People may accuse
Cunda of serving me an unworthy meal, so I want you to tell him that the two
meals I treasure the most in my life were the one I ate just before attaining the
Way and my last meal before passing into Nirvana. He should feel nothing but
happiness for having served me one of those meals.”
To Ananda’s surprise, when he scooped up the muddy water into a jug, it turned
perfectly clear.


  After resting a short while, the Buddha stood up and said, “Ananda, let us
cross the Hirannavati River and enter the forest of sal trees which belongs to the
Malla people. That forest, at the entrance to Kusinara, is most beautiful.”


                               Chapter Eighty
                                   Be Diligent!
It was dusk by the time the Buddha and the bhikkhus reached the forest of sal
trees. The Buddha asked Ananda to prepare a place between two sal trees for
him to lie down. The Buddha lay on his side, his head facing north. All the
bhikkhus sat around him. They knew that the Buddha would pass into nirvana
that same night.
   The Buddha looked up at the trees and said, “Ananda, look! It is not yet
spring, but the sal trees are covered with red blossoms. Do you see the petals
falling on the Tathagata’s robes and the robes of all the bhikkhus? This forest is
truly beautiful. Do you see the western horizon all aglow from the setting sun?
Do you hear the gentle breeze rustling in the sal branches? The Tathagata finds
all these things lovely and touching. Bhikkhus, if you want to please me, if you
want to express your respect and gratitude to the Tathagata, there is only one
way, and that is by living the teaching.”
   The evening was warm and Venerable Upavana stood over the Buddha to fan
him, but the Buddha asked him not to. Perhaps the Buddha did not want his
splendid view of the setting sun obstructed.
   The Buddha asked Venerable Anuruddha, “I do not see Ananda, where is he?”
   Another bhikkhu spoke up, “I saw brother Ananda standing behind some trees
weeping. He was saying to himself, ‘I have not yet attained my spiritual goal and
now my teacher is dying. Who has ever cared more deeply for me than my
teacher?’”
   The Buddha asked the bhikkhu to summon Ananda. The Buddha tried to
comfort Ananda. He said, “Don’t be so sad, Ananda. The Tathagata has often
reminded you that all dharmas are impermanent. With birth, there is death; with
arising, there is dissolving; with coming together, there is separation. How can
there be birth without death? How can there be arising without dissolving? How
can there be coming together without separation? Ananda, you have cared for
me with all your heart for many years. You have devoted all your efforts to
helping me and I am most grateful to you. Your merit is great, Ananda, but you
can go even farther. If you make just a little more effort, you can overcome birth


and death. You can attain freedom and transcend every sorrow. I know you can
do that, and that is what would make me the most happy.”
   Turning to the other bhikkhus, the Buddha said, “No one has been as good an
attendant as Ananda. Other attendants in the past sometimes dropped my robe or
bowl to the ground, but never Ananda. He has taken care of all my needs from
the tiniest detail to the largest tasks. Ananda always knew when and where a
bhikkhu, bhikkhuni, lay disciple, king, official, or practitioner from a different
religious sect, should meet with me. He arranged all meetings most effectively
and intelligently. The Tathagata believes that no enlightened master in the past or
future could have an attendant more talented and devoted than Ananda.”
   Venerable Ananda wiped his tears and said, “Lord, please don’t pass away
here. Kusinara is just a small town of mud dwellings. There are so many more
worthy places like Sampa, Rajagaha, Savatthi, Sakkata, Kosambi, or Varanasi.
Please Lord, select such a place to pass away so that more people will have a
chance to see your face one last time.”
   The Buddha replied, “Ananda, Kusinara is also important, even if it is no
more than a small town of mud dwellings. The Tathagata finds this forest most
agreeable. Ananda, do you see the sal flowers falling about me?”
   The Buddha asked Ananda to go into Kusinara and announce to the Mallas
that the Buddha would pass into nirvana in the grove of sal trees at the night’s
last watch. When the Malla people heard this news, they hastily made their way
to the forest. An ascetic named Subhadda was among them. While the people
took turns bowing to the Buddha, Subhadda asked Venerable Ananda if he could
have an audience with the Buddha. Ananda refused, saying the Buddha was too
tired to receive anyone. But the Buddha overheard their conversation and said,
“Ananda, let ascetic Subhadda speak with me. The Tathagata will receive him.”
   Ascetic Subhadda knelt before the Buddha. He had long felt drawn to the
Buddha’s teaching but had never met him before. He bowed and said, “Lord, I
have heard about spiritual leaders such as Purana Kassapa, Makhali Gosala,
Ajita Kesakambalin, Pakudha Kaccayana, Sanjaya Belatthiputta, and Nigantha
Nathaputta. I would like to ask if, according to you, any of them attained true
enlightenment.”
   The Buddha answered, “Subhadda, whether or not they attained
enlightenment is not a necessary thing to discuss now. Subhadda, the Tathagata
will show you the path by which you yourself can attain enlightenment.”
   The Buddha spoke to Subhadda about the Noble Eightfold Path. He concluded
by saying, “Subhadda, wherever the Noble Eightfold Path is truly practiced, you


will find people who have attained enlightenment. Subhadda, if you follow this
path, you, too, can attain enlightenment.”
   Ascetic Subhadda felt his heart suddenly opened. He was filled with great
happiness. He asked the Buddha to accept him as a bhikkhu. The Buddha asked
the Venerable Anuruddha to perform the ordination ceremony right then and
there. Subhadda was the last disciple received by the Buddha.
   After Subhadda’s head was shaved, he received the precepts and was given a
robe and bowl. The Buddha then looked at all the bhikkhus sitting around him.
Many bhikkhus from the vicinity had arrived and so there were now nearly five
hundred. The Buddha spoke to them.
   “Bhikkhus! If you have any doubts or perplexity concerning the teaching, now
is the time to ask the Tathagata about it. Don’t let this opportunity pass by, so
that later you will reproach yourselves, saying, ‘That day I was face to face with
the Buddha but I did not ask him.’”
   The Buddha repeated these words three times, but no bhikkhu spoke.
   Venerable Ananda exclaimed, “Lord, it is truly wonderful! I have faith in the
community of bhikkhus. I have faith in the sangha. Everyone has clearly
understood your teaching. No one has any doubts or perplexity about your
teaching and the path to realize it.”
   The Buddha said, “Ananda, you speak from faith, while the Tathagata has
direct knowledge. The Tathagata knows that all the bhikkhus here possess deep
faith in the Three Gems. Even the lowest attainment among these bhikkhus is
that of Stream-Enterer.”
   The Buddha looked quietly over the community and then said, “Bhikkhus,
listen to what the Tathagata now says. Dharmas are impermanent. If there is
birth, there is death. Be diligent in your efforts to attain liberation!”
   The Buddha closed his eyes. He had spoken his last words. The earth shook.
Sal blossoms fell like rain. Everyone felt their minds and bodies tremble. They
knew the Buddha had passed into nirvana.
   Reader, please put your book down here and breathe lightly for a few minutes
before continuing.
   The Buddha had passed away. Some bhikkhus threw up their arms and flung
themselves on the ground. They wailed, “The Buddha has passed away! The
Lord has died! The eyes of the world are no more! Who can we take refuge in
now?”


    While these bhikkhus cried and thrashed about, other bhikkhus sat silently,
observing their breath and contemplating the things the Buddha had taught them.
Venerable Anuruddha spoke up, “Brothers, do not cry so pitifully! The Lord
Buddha taught us that with birth there is death, with arising there is dissolving,
with coming together there is separation. If you understand and follow the
Buddha’s teaching, you will cease to make such a disturbance. Please sit up
again and follow your breathing. We will maintain silence.”
    Everyone returned to his place and followed Venerable Anuruddha’s counsel.
He led them in reciting sutras they all knew by heart which spoke about
impermanence, emptiness of self, non-attachment, and liberation. Calm dignity
was restored.
    The Mallas lit torches. Sounds of chanting echoed impressively in the dark
night as everyone placed his full awareness on the words in the sutras. After a
lengthy recitation, Venerable Anuruddha gave a Dharma talk. He praised the
Buddha’s attainments—his wisdom, compassion, virtue, concentration, joy, and
equanimity. When Venerable Anuruddha finished speaking, Venerable Ananda
recounted beautiful episodes from the Buddha’s life. Throughout the night, the
two venerables took turns speaking. The five hundred bhikkhus and three
hundred lay disciples listened quietly. As torches burned down, new ones were
lit to take their places until dawn broke.


                             Chapter Eighty-One
                             Old Path White Clouds
W hen day broke, Venerable Anuruddha said to Venerable Ananda, “Brother, go
into Kusinara and inform the authorities that our Master has passed away so that
they may begin the necessary arrangements.”
   Venerable Ananda put on his outer robe and entered town. The Malla officials
were holding a meeting to discuss local matters. When they learned the Buddha
had passed away they expressed deep sorrow and regret. They put aside all other
work in order to make arrangements for the Buddha’s funeral. By the time the
sun was perched above the trees, everyone in Kusinara knew of the Buddha’s
death in the forest of sal trees. Many beat their chests and sobbed. They regretted
they had not been able to look upon and bow to the Buddha before his death.
People came to the forest bearing flowers, incense, musical instruments, and
cloth streamers. They prostrated and placed flowers and incense around his body.
They performed special songs and dances, and draped colorful streamers
throughout the forest. People brought food offerings to the five hundred
bhikkhus. Before long the sal forest had the atmosphere of a festival.
Occasionally, Venerable Anuruddha invited the sound of the large bell to call
people back to silence. He then led everyone in reciting passages from the sutras.
   For six days and nights, the people of Kusinara and nearby Pava came to offer
flowers, incense, dance, and music. Man-darava blossoms and other flowers
soon thickly carpeted the area between the two sal trees. On the seventh day the
Malla authorities bathed themselves in water perfumed with incense, put on
ceremonial garments, and carried the Buddha’s body into town. They passed
through the town’s center and out the East gate to Makuta-Bandhana temple, the
main temple of the Mallas.
For six days and nights, the people of Kusinara came to the sal forest to offer
flowers, incense, dance, and music to the Buddha.


   The town officials had planned a funeral fit for a king. The Buddha’s body
was wrapped in many layers of cloth and then placed in an iron coffin which was
placed in another, larger iron coffin. It was then placed on a great funeral pyre of
fragrant wood.
   The moment to light the pyre had come. Just as the authorities approached
with their torches, a messenger on horseback rode up and asked them to wait. He
informed them that Venerable Mahakassapa and five hundred bhikkhus were on
their way to the funeral from Pava.
   Venerable Mahakassapa had been teaching the Dharma in Campa. He learned
of the Buddha’s imminent death in Vesali and that the Buddha was traveling


north. The venerable immediately set out to find the Buddha. Everywhere he
went, other bhikkhus asked to join him. By the time he reached Bhanagama,
there were five hundred with him. When they reached Pava, they met a traveler
coming from the opposite direction with a sal flower tucked in his shirt. The man
informed them that the Buddha had already passed away in the sal forest near
Kusinara six days earlier. With that news, Mahakassapa’s search came to an end,
and he led his bhikkhus towards Kusinara. They met a man on horseback who
agreed to gallop ahead to inform Venerable Anuruddha that they were on their
way to attend the funeral.
   At noon, Venerable Mahakassapa and the five hundred bhikkhus reached
Makuta-Bandhana temple. The Venerable placed the end of his robe over his
right shoulder, joined his palms and solemnly walked around the altar three
times. He faced the Buddha and prostrated along with the five hundred bhikkhus.
After they completed their third bow, the pyre was lit. Everyone, bhikkhus and
laity alike, knelt down and joined their palms. Venerable Anuruddha invited the
bell to sound and led everyone in reciting passages on impermanence, emptiness
of self, non-attachment, and liberation. It was a most majestic sound.
   When the fire died down, perfume was poured over the ashes. The coffin was
lowered and opened up, and the authorities placed the Buddha’s relics into a
golden jar, which was placed on the temple’s main altar. Senior disciples took
turns guarding the relics. News of the Buddha’s death had been sent several days
earlier to other cities, and delegations from neighboring kingdoms arrived to pay
their respects. They were given a share of the Buddha’s relics to be kept in
stupas. There were representatives from Magadha, Vesali, Sakya, Koliya,
Bulaya, Pava, and Vetha. They divided the relics into eight portions. The people
of Magadha would build a stupa in Rajagaha, the people of Licchavi would build
one in Vesali, the people of Sakya would build one in Kapilavatthu, the Buli
people in Allakappa, the Koliya people in Ramagama, the Vetha people in
Vethadipa, and the Mallas in both Kusinara and Pava.
   After the delegations returned to their own countries, all the bhikkhus returned
to their own locales to practice and teach. Venerables Mahakassapa, Anuruddha,
and Ananda brought the Buddha’s begging bowl back to Bamboo Forest.
   A month later, Venerable Mahakassapa organized an assembly of bhikkhus in
Rajagaha with the purpose of compiling all the sutras and precepts that the
Buddha had given them. Five hundred bhikkhus were to be selected based on
their standing and experience in the sangha. The assembly was to begin at the
beginning of the retreat season and last for six months.


   Venerable Mahakassapa had been considered the fourth highest-ranking
disciple of the Buddha after Venerables Kondanna, Sariputta, and Moggallana.
He was especially regarded for his simple living and humility. He had been
deeply trusted and loved by the Buddha. Everyone in the sangha had heard about
the time twenty years earlier when Mahakassapa sewed his own sanghati from
several hundred scraps of discarded cloth. Once he folded this sanghati and
invited the Buddha to sit upon it. The Buddha remarked how soft a cushion it
made and Venerable Mahakassapa offered the robe to the Buddha. The Buddha
accepted it with a smile and offered his own sanghati to Mahakassapa in return.
Everyone also knew that Mahakassapa was the one monk who smiled the time
the Buddha silently lifted up a lotus flower at Jetavana. Mahakassapa had thus
received the Buddha’s transmission of the Dharma treasure.
   King Ajatasattu sponsored the assembly. Because Venerable Upali was highly
regarded for his thorough knowledge of the precepts, he was invited to recite
them all for the assembly, as well as recount the specific conditions and
situations that gave rise to each of the precepts. Venerable Ananda was to be
invited to repeat all of the Buddha’s Dharma talks, including the details
concerning the time, place, and situation that gave rise to each talk.
   Naturally, Venerables Upali and Ananda could not be expected to remember
every detail, and so the presence of five hundred respected bhikkhus was of great
help. During the special gathering, all the precepts were compiled and given the
name Vinaya pitaka, the basket of discipline. The basket of compiled Dharma
talks was named Sutra pitaka. The sutras were divided into four categories,
based on their length and subject matter. Venerable Ananda shared with the
assembly that the Buddha had told him that after the Buddha’s death, they could
discard the lesser precepts. The other bhikkhus asked Ananda whether the
Buddha had stated clearly which precepts he meant, but Ananda admitted he had
not thought of asking the Buddha that question. After lengthy discussion, the
bhikkhus decided to preserve all the precepts for both bhikkhus and bhikkhunis.
   Remembering the Buddha’s words, they agreed not to render the sutras into
the classical meter of the Vedic language. Ardhamagadhi was the primary
language the sutras and precepts had been given in. The assembly agreed to
encourage the translation of the sutras into other languages to enable people to
study them in their native tongues. They also decided to increase the number of
bhanaka, bhikkhus whose role it was to recite the sutras in order to transmit
them for both present and future generations.
   When the assembly adjourned, all the bhikkhus returned to their own places of


practice and teaching.
Along the banks of the Neranjara River, Venerable Svasti stood to watch the
flowing waters. Young buffalo boys on the opposite shore were preparing to lead
their buffaloes across the shallow river. Each boy carried a sickle and a basket,
just as Svasti had done forty-five years earlier. He knew that the boys would fill
their baskets with fresh kusa grass while the buffaloes grazed.
   The Buddha had bathed in this same river. There was the bodhi tree, more
green and healthy than ever. Venerable Svasti slept beneath that beloved tree
during the night. The forest was no longer the place of solitude it had once been.
The bodhi tree was now a place where pilgrims visited, and much of the forest
had been cleared of brush and thorns.
   Venerable Svasti felt grateful that he had been one of the five hundred
bhikkhus invited to attend the assembly. He was now fifty-six years old. His
closest friend on the path, Venerable Rahula, had died five years earlier. Rahula
had been an embodiment of devoted and diligent effort. Though he was the son
of royalty, he lived in utmost simplicity. He was a modest man, and though his
accomplishments in spreading the teaching were great, he never spoke about
them.
   Venerable Svasti had been with the Buddha on his last journey from Rajagaha
to Kusinara. He was present during the final hours of the Buddha’s life. On the
road from Pava to Kusinara, Svasti remembered how Venerable Ananda asked
the Buddha where he was heading. The Buddha simply said, “I’m heading
north.” Svasti felt he understood. Throughout his life, the Buddha had traveled
without thinking about his destination. He had taken each step mindfully,
enjoying the present moment. Like an elephant prince returning to its native land
when it knows its time has come, the Buddha headed north in the last days of his
life. He didn’t need to reach Kapilavatthu or Lumbini before he passed into
nirvana. To head north was sufficient. Kusinara itself was the Lumbini Gardens.
Venerable Svasti watched the young buffalo boys cross the Neranjara River.


   Drawn homeward in a similar way, Venerable Svasti had returned to the banks
of the Neranjara the night before. This was his own home. He still felt like the
eleven-year-old who tended another man’s buffaloes to feed his younger
siblings. Uruvela village was the same as ever. Papaya trees still grew before
every house. The rice fields were still there, the gentle river flowed as before.
Water buffalos were still led and bathed by young buffalo boys. Though Sujata
no longer lived in the village and his own siblings had started families of their
own and moved away, Uruvela would always be Svasti’s home. Svasti thought
back to the first time he saw the young monk Siddhartha doing walking
meditation in the forest. He thought of the many meals the village children had


shared with Siddhartha beneath the cool shade of the pippala tree. These images
of the past could live again. When the buffalo boys crossed over to his side, he
would introduce himself. Every one of those boys was Svasti. Just as long ago he
had been given a chance to enter the path of peace, joy, and liberation, he would
show the path to these young boys.
   Venerable Svasti smiled. A month earlier in Kusinara, he had listened to
Venerable Mahakassapa tell about an encounter he had with a young bhikkhu
named Subhada who traveled with him from Pava. When Subhada learned that
the Buddha had already passed away, he remarked glibly, “The old man is gone.
From now on, we are free. No one will scold or reproach us any more.”
Venerable Mahakassapa was shocked at the young bhikkhu’s foolish comment,
but he did not say anything.
   Venerable Mahakassapa did not scold the young Subhada, but he did not
mince words with Venerable Ananda, even though Ananda was a deeply
respected senior disciple. Venerable Ananda’s presence at the assembly was
considered essential in order to accurately compile all the sutras. Nonetheless,
just three days prior to the assembly, Venerable Mahakassapa told Venerable
Ananda that he was seriously considering barring Ananda from the gathering.
The reason he gave was that although Venerable Ananda had a solid grasp of the
teaching, he had not yet attained true realization. The other bhikkhus feared
Ananda would be insulted by Mahakassapa’s comments and perhaps even leave,
but Ananda simply retired to his own hut and closed the door. He remained there
three days and nights deep in meditation. Just before dawn on the day of the
assembly, Venerable Ananda attained the Great Awakening. After practicing
sitting meditation all night long, he finally decided to rest. As his back touched
his sleeping mat, he attained enlightenment.
   That morning when Venerable Mahakassapa met Venerable Ananda, he
looked into Ananda’s eyes and knew at once what had happened. He told
Ananda he would see him at the assembly.
   Svasti looked up and saw the white clouds floating across the blue sky. The
sun had risen high, and the green grass along the riverbanks sparkled in the
morning light. The Buddha had walked on this very path many times as he
traveled to Varanasi, Savatthi, Rajagaha, and countless other places. The
Buddha’s footprints were everywhere, and with each mindful step, Svasti knew
he was walking in the footsteps of the Buddha. The Buddha’s path was at his
feet. The same clouds the Buddha had seen were in the sky. Each serene step
brought to life the old path and white clouds of the Buddha. The path of the


Buddha was beneath his very feet.
   The Buddha had passed away, but Venerable Svasti could see his presence
everywhere. Bodhi seeds had been planted throughout the Ganga basin. They
had taken root and given rise to healthy trees. No one had heard of the Buddha
or the Way of Awakening forty-five years before. Now saffron-robed monks and
nuns were a common sight. Many Dharma centers had been established. Kings
and their families had taken the refuges, as had scholars and officials. The
poorest and most oppressed members of society had found refuge in the Way of
Awakening. They had found liberation for their lives and spirits in the Way.
Forty-five years before, Svasti was a poor, untouchable buffalo boy. Today he
was a bhikkhu who had transcended all the barriers of caste and prejudice.
Venerable Svasti had been greeted respectfully by kings.
   Who was the Buddha that he had been able to effect such profound change?
Venerable Svasti asked himself that question as he watched the buffalo boys
busily cutting kusa grass along the shore. Though many of the Buddha’s senior
disciples had passed away, there remained bhikkhus of great effort and
attainment. Many of these monks were still young. The Buddha was like the
seed of a mighty bodhi tree. The seed had cracked open in order for strong roots
to take hold in the earth. Perhaps when people looked at the tree, they no longer
saw the seed, but the seed was there. It had not perished. It had become the tree
itself. The Buddha taught that nothing passes from existence to non-existence.
The Buddha had changed form, but he was still present. Anyone who looked
deeply could see the Buddha within the sangha. They could see him in the
presence of young bhikkhus who were diligent, kind, and wise. Venerable Svasti
understood that he had a responsibility to nurture the Dharma body of the
Buddha. The Dharma body was the teaching and the community. As long as the
Dharma and the Sangha remained strong, the Buddha would remain present.
   Venerable Svasti smiled as he watched the buffalo boys cross to his side of the
river. If he didn’t continue the Buddha’s work by bringing equality, peace, and
joy to these children, who would? The Buddha had initiated the work. His
disciples would have to continue it. The bodhi seeds that the Buddha sowed
would continue to put forth roots throughout the world. Venerable Svasti felt as
if the Buddha had sown ten thousand precious seeds in the earth of his own
heart. Svasti would tend those seeds carefully to help them grow into strong,
healthy bodhi trees. People said that the Buddha had died, yet Svasti saw that the
Buddha was more present than ever. He was present in Svasti’s own mind and
body. He was present everywhere Svasti looked—in the bodhi tree, the


Neranjara River, the green grass, the white clouds, and the leaves. The young
buffalo boys were themselves the Buddha. Venerable Svasti felt a special
relation to them. In a moment, he would strike up a conversation with them.
They too could continue the Buddha’s work. Svasti understood that the way to
continue the Buddha’s work was to look at all things with awareness, to take
peaceful steps, and to smile with compassion, as the Buddha had done.
   The Buddha was the source. Venerable Svasti and the young buffalo boys
were rivers that flowed from that source. Wherever the rivers flowed, the
Buddha would be there.


                                  Appendix
                        Chapter Contents & Sources
Abbreviations used for sutras
Transliteration of Chinese is from Taisho Revised Tripitaka
A note from the author
In researching and writing this book, I have drawn almost exclusively from the
texts of the so-called “Lesser Vehicle,” purposefully using very little from
Mahayana texts in order to demonstrate that the more expansive ideas and
doctrines associated with Mahayana can all be found in the earlier Pali Nikayas
and Chinese Agamas. One need only read these sutras with an open mind to see
that all sutras are sutras of Buddhism, whether they belong to the Northern or


Southern Tradition.
   Mahayana sutras offer a more liberal and broad way of looking at and
understanding the basic teachings of Buddhism. This has the effect of preventing
the reification of the teachings, which can come about from a narrow or rigid
way of learning and practice. Mahayana sutras help us discover the depths of the
Nikaya and Agama texts. They are like a light projected onto an object under a
microscope, an object that has somehow been distorted by artificial means of
preservation. Of course the Nikayas and the Agamas are closer to the original
form of the Buddha’s teachings, but they have been altered and modified by the
understanding and practice of the traditions that have passed them down.
Modern scholars and practitioners should be able to restore original Buddhism
from the available texts of both the Southern and Northern Traditions. We need
to be familiar with the texts of both traditions.
   I have avoided including the many miracles that are often used in the sutras to
embellish the Buddha’s life. The Buddha himself advised his disciples not to
waste time and energy on acquiring or practicing supernatural powers. I have,
however, included many of the difficulties the Buddha encountered during his
life from both the larger society and his own disciples. If the Buddha appears in
this book as a man close to us, it is partly thanks to recounting such difficulties.
   I have used the Pali version of most people and place names and technical
Buddhist terms, as Pali is easier to pronounce. But I have used the Sanskrit
version of those names and terms that are already familiar to Westerners, such as
Siddhartha, Gautama, Dharma, sutra, nirvana, karma, atman, and bodhisattva.
Many of the Pali-Sanskrit equivalents are listed at the end of the appendix.
Chapter Contents & Sources


Book One

                   Chapter One: Walking Just to Walk
  Summary: The Buddha stops by Uruvela village along the Neranjara River in
order to bring Svasti back to Bamboo Forest Monastery in Rajagaha for
ordination. Svasti becomes acquainted with Rahula.
  Sources: Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186), Fo So Hing Tsan (T. 192), Fo Pen
Hing Tsi King (T. 190), Fo Chouo Fang Nieou King (T. 123), Lalitavistara,
Buddhacarita.
  Additional note: The young boy who cut kusa grass named Svastika is
mentioned in Lalitavistara, T. 186, and T. 187. A French translation of the
Lalitavistara by P. Foucaux can be found in the Annales du Musée Guimet,
Volume VI (1884) and Volume XIX (1892).


                 Chapter Two: Tending Water Buffaloes
  The Buddha delivers the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes. Svasti confides to
Rahula that he is homesick. Rahula tells Svasti that Venerable Ananda wishes to
meet him.
  Culagopalaka Sutta (M. 34); Mahagopalaka Sutta (M. 33); A. 11, 18; Fo
Chouo Fang Nieou King (T. 123) (Tseng 43, 6); Fang Nieou King (Tseng 49, 1).
  The contents of the Sutra on Tending Water Buffaloes in this chapter were
drawn from T. 123. Details about tending water buffaloes are also mentioned in
Tseng 43, 6; Tseng 49, 1; M. 34 and M. 33.


               Chapter Three: An Armful of Kusa Grass
   Svasti meets Siddhartha for the first time and makes him a gift of kusa grass
to use as a meditation cushion.
   Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T.
186); Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita; Fo Chouo Fang Nieou King (T. 123).


                   Chapter Four: The Wounded Swan
  Svasti meets Sujata for the first time. Siddhartha tells them the story about the
swan shot down by Devadatta’s arrow.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita.


                     Chapter Five: A Bowl of Milk
   Sujata meets Siddhartha for the first time after finding him collapsed by the
river shore.
   Fo So Hing Tsan (T. 192); Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang Kouang Ta
Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita.
   Buddhacarita mentions a girl named Nandabala who offers the Buddha a bowl
of milk. Perhaps Nandabala and Sujata were the same person.


                 Chapter Six: Beneath a Rose-Apple Tree
   Prince Siddhartha is born. Asita Kaladevala visits the palace. Siddhartha
attends the ritual plowing of the fields. He sits in meditation for the first time.
   Acchariya-abbhuta Sutta (M. 123); Mahapadana Sutta (D. 14); Nalaka Sutta
(Sn. III, 11); Fo So Hing Tsan (T. 192); Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang
Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190):
Buddhacarita.
   Fo So Hing Tsan (T. 192), the translation of Buddhacaritakavya Sutta, is
referred to in abbreviated form as Buddhacarita. The author was Asvaghosa. The
Buddhacarita was translated in 1893 by E. B. Cowell and was printed in Volume
XLVI of The Sacred Books of the East. Fo So Hing Tsan was also translated into
English by S. Beal under the name The Romantic Legend of Sakya Buddha,
published in London in 1875.
   In the Southern Tradition, Queen Mahamaya’s dream of being pregnant and
the birth of Siddhartha are recorded in M. 123, as well as D. 14. The visit of the
hermit Asita is recounted in Sn. III, 11.


                 Chapter Seven: White Elephant Prize
  Siddhartha furthers his studies. He reacts against the philosophy and lifestyle
of the brahmans. Siddhartha attends the martial arts competition organized by
Dandapani.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T.
187); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita.


                 Chapter Eight: The Jewelled Necklace
  Siddhartha encounters Yasodhara in a poor hamlet. Queen Gotami presents the
kingdom’s young women.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita.


                 Chapter Nine: The Path of Compassion
   Siddhartha and Yasodhara celebrate their marriage. They take a journey
throughout the kingdom. Queen Gotami and Yasodhara join efforts to assist the
needy.
   A. III, 38; Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita.
   The fact that Siddhartha is given three palaces by his royal father is recorded
in A. III, 38.


                      Chapter Ten: Unborn Child
  Siddhartha begins studies to prepare for the throne. Yasodhara announces that
she is pregnant.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Fang
Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita.


                   Chapter Eleven: Moonlight Flute
  Siddhartha plays the flute while Anuruddha listens. Yasodhara gives birth to
Rahula.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Fang
Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita.


                         Chapter Twelve: Kanthaka
   On a spring outing, Siddhartha encounters a sick man who dies. Yasodhara has
three dreams which announce Siddhartha’s departure. Siddhartha asks his father
for permission to become a monk. The king refuses. Siddhartha leaves in the
middle of the night after a party.
   Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita.


            Chapter Thirteen: Beginning Spiritual Practice
  Siddhartha crosses the Anoma River and tells Channa to return with Kanthaka
carrying his hair, necklace, and sword. Siddhartha trades his princely garments
with a hunter for a monk’s robe and then meets a monk. The monk leads
Siddhartha to the spiritual center of Master Alara Kalama. Siddhartha learns to
beg and to practice sitting meditation, the four dhyanas, and three of the formless
concentrations.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita; Pasarasi Sutta (M. 126); Mahasaccaka Sutta (M.
36).
  Siddhartha’s studies of meditation with Master Kalama, his attainment of the
Realm of No Materiality, and his departure from Master Kalama are recorded in
M. 26 and Tchong 204. They are also mentioned in M. 36, M. 85, M. 100, Tsa
110, and Wou Fen Liu (T. 1421).


                  Chapter Fourteen: Crossing the Ganga
   Siddhartha leaves Master Alara Kalama and crosses the Ganga (Ganges River)
into Magadha in search of another spiritual teacher. He encounters a number of
spiritual seekers from different sects. He meets King Bimbisara. Siddhartha finds
his way to the spiritual center of Addaka Ramaputta.
   Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita; Pabbajja Sutta (Sn. III, 1); Pasarasi Sutta (M. 26);
Mahasaccaka Sutta (M. 36); Bodhirajakumara Sutta (M. 85), Tsa 107.
   Siddhartha meeting King Bimbisara is recorded in Sn. III, 1.


                      Chapter Fifteen: Forest Ascetic
   Siddhartha attains the Realm of Neither Perception Nor Non-Perception under
the guidance of Master Ramaputta. Having not attained his goal with this Master
either, Siddhartha departs for Dangsiri mountain for a period of self-
mortification. He abandons self-mortification and begins to eat and drink
normally again. He is abandoned by his five friends. Gautama practices beneath
the pippala tree.
   Fo Chouo Fou Yao King Z (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Pabbajja
Sutta (Sn. III, 1); Pasarasi Sutta (M. 26); Mahasaccaka Sutta (M. 36);
Bodhirajakumara Sutta (M. 85); Bhayabherava Sutta (M. 4), Wou Fen Liu (T.
1421).
   Siddhartha’s attainment of the Realm of Neither Perception Nor Non-
Perception is recorded in M. 26. His efforts to control fear are mentioned in M. 4
and Tseng 23, 31. His self-mortification practices are mentioned in M. 36, as
well as in M. 85, M. 100, and Wou Fen Liu (T. 1421).


               Chapter Sixteen: Was Yasodhara Sleeping?
  Svasti asks Bhikkhuni Pajapati details about the Buddha’s life before and after
he became a monk.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara, Buddhacarita; Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187).


                     Chapter Seventeen: Pippala Leaf
   Beneath the pippala tree, Gautama contemplates on the nature of the
emptiness, impermanence, and interdependence of all things.
   Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita; Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187), Tsa
287, Tseng 38.4.
   Siddhartha’s discovery of the nature of interdependence of all things is
recorded in S. XII, 65, Tsa 287, and in many other sutras.


           Chapter Eighteen: The Morning Star Has Risen
  Gautama contemplates on the nature of dependent co-arising and the birthless
and deathless nature of all things. He attains the six abhijñas and transcends birth
and death. He attains Total Awakening. That morning, Svasti pays him a visit.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita; Fang Kouang
Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Mahasaccaka Sutta (M. 36); S. XII, 65; XXII,
26; Pasarasi Sutta (M. 26); Dhammapada 153-154; Ud. I, 1-3.
  The passage “O jailkeeper...” is recorded in Dh. 153-154.


              Chapter Nineteen: Tangerine of Mindfulness
   The village children visit Gautama bringing with them a basket of tangerines,
fresh coconut and palm sugar. Gautama teaches the children about mindfulness.
The children give him the name “Buddha, ” his path “The Way of Awakening,”
and the pippala tree the “bodhi tree.”
   Lalitavistara; Nian Tchou King (Tchong 98); Satipatthana Sutta (M. 10).
   Ideas concerning mindfulness are drawn from M. 10 and Tchong 98.


                          Chapter Twenty: The Deer
  The Buddha tells the children a past-life tale concerning the friendship
between a deer, a turtle, and a magpie.
  Cheng King (T. 154); Jataka (Kh. 10); Siuan Tsi Po Yuan King (T. 200);
Purnamukhavadanasataka; Lieou Tou Tsi King (T. 152).


                  Chapter Twenty-One: The Lotus Pond
  The Buddha visits a lotus pond and reflects on how to teach the Way to others.
He meets the monk Upaka and inquires about the Masters Kalama and
Ramaputta. He bids farewell to the village children and heads for Varanasi in
search of his five friends.
  Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Lalitavistara; Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; S.
VI, 1.
  Comparing people’s characteristics to parts of the lotus is contained in Vin.
Mv. Kh. 1.


         Chapter Twenty-Two: Turning the Wheel of Dharma
   The Buddha teaches the Way to his five friends in the Deer Park.
   Lalitavistara; Buddhacarita; Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; S. LVI, 11; Pasarasi Sutta (M.
26); Fo Chouo Tchouan Fa Louen King (T. 109); Fo Chouo Pa Tcheng Tao King
(T. 112).
   The encounter between the Buddha and the five friends who practiced self-
mortification with him is recounted in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1 and S. LVI, 11.


                Chapter Twenty-Three: Dharma Nectar
   The Buddha ordains Yasa and instructs Yasa’s parents in the five precepts for
lay disciples.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang
Yen King (T. 187).
   Yasa’s ordination is recounted in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1.


                  Chapter Twenty-Four: Taking Refuge
   Fifty-four of Yasa’s friends ask to be ordained. The Buddha sends his disciples
out to teach the Dharma. The Buddha formalizes the ritual for ordination.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King
(T. 187); Lalitavistara.
   Most of the details contained in this chapter are contained in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1.


               Chapter Twenty-Five: Music’s Lofty Peaks
   The Buddha converts thirty young men by his flute playing.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King
(T. 187); Lalitavistara; Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186).
   The episode between the Buddha and the thirty young men is recounted in
Vin. Mv. Kh. 1.


                  Chapter Twenty-Six: Water Rises, Too
   The Buddha discusses with Kassapa the nature of the universe and the
principle of interdependence. The Buddha spends the night in the altar room. At
night the altar room burns down. The Buddha explains emptiness to Kassapa and
how it is not the same as nihilism.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King
(T. 187); Lalitavistara; Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190).
   The Buddha’s ordination of the three Kassapa brothers is told in Vin. Mv. Kh.
1.


          Chapter Twenty-Seven: All Dharmas Are on Fire
  The Buddha teaches Kassapa the Four Noble Truths and explains why it is not
necessary to have a separate self in order to attain liberation. The three Kassapa
brothers and their nine hundred disciples ask to be ordained by the Buddha. The
Buddha delivers the Fire Sutra.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T.
186); S. XXXV, 28.
  The Fire Sutra is contained in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1. Also look at S. XXXV, 28.


                  Chapter Twenty-Eight: Palm Forest
  The Buddha together with a thousand bhikkhus returns to Rajagaha. King
Bimbisara and his family and attendants visit the Buddha and listen to him
deliver a Dharma discourse.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Lalitavistara; Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Fang Kouang Ta
Tchouang Yen King (T. 187).


            Chapter Twenty-Nine: Dependent Co-Arising
  Many people come to Palm Forest to request to be ordained or to be accepted
as lay disciples. Venerable Kondanna gives a discourse on the Three Gems.
Thanks to meeting Assaji, Sariputta and Moggallana ask to be ordained by the
Buddha.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 1, 23, 1 ff.; Lalitavistara; Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186).
  The gatha recited by Assaji to Sariputta is in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1, 23, 5.


Book Two

                      Chapter Thirty: Bamboo Forest
   The Buddha and his bhikkhus partake of a meal at the palace. The Buddha
speaks of the five precepts as principles of living which can build long-lasting
peace and prosperity for the kingdom. The Buddha tells the children a past-life
tale about a plumeria tree. King Bimbisara offers Bamboo Forest to the Buddha
and his sangha.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Jataka (Kh. 10); Siuan Tsi Po Yuan King (T. 200);
Purnapukhavadanasataka; Lieou Tou Tsi King (T. 152); Cheng King (T. 154).
   The invitation to the palace and King Bimbisara’s offering of Bamboo Forest
are both recounted in Vin. Mv. Kh. 1.


          Chapter Thirty-One: I Will Return in the Spring
  The community of bhikkhus organizes a retreat season at Bamboo Forest.
Kaludayi is sent by King Suddhodana to invite the Buddha to return home.
Kaludayi asks to be ordained.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang
Yen King (T. 157); Lalitavistara; Thag.
  Kaludayi being sent by King Suddhodana to invite the Buddha to return is
mentioned in Thag. (527-33).


           Chapter Thirty-Two: The Finger is Not the Moon
   The Buddha teaches Dighanakha about attachment to views and the nature of
feelings. The Dharma discourse brings about Sariputta’s awakening, and
Dighanakha asks to be ordained. A rumor to stain the Buddha’s reputation
circulates in the capital.
   Dighanakha Sutta (M. 74); Tch‘ang Tchao Fan Tche Ts’ing Wen King (T.
584).


         Chapter Thirty-Three: Beauty That Does Not Fade
  Ambapali and Jivaka visit the Buddha. The Buddha teaches his bhikkhus
concerning beauty and ugliness.
  S. 47, 1; Tsa 622; Mahaparinibbana Sutta (D. 16); Vin. Mv. Kh. 6; Jivaka
Sutta (M. 55).


                      Chapter Thirty-Four: Reunion
   The Buddha returns to Kapilavatthu. King Suddhodana enters the city to greet
the Buddha. The Buddha explains the meaning and purpose of begging to the
king. Rahula asks the Buddha for his inheritance. The Buddha and his attendant
are invited to the palace for a meal. The Buddha tells the story of his spiritual
search.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187); Lalitavistara.


           Chapter Thirty-Five: Early Morning Sunshine
  The Buddha and his sangha are invited to a meal at the palace together with
guests of King Suddhodana. The Buddha gives a discourse on the Four Noble
Truths and how to meditate in order to transcend suffering. Gotami and
Yasodhara visit the Buddha at Nigrodha Monastery.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 1.


                    Chapter Thirty-Six: Lotus Vow
  Yasodhara invites the Buddha and Kaludayi to a meal at the palace. The
Buddha meets with children in a poor village and tells them the past-life story of
Megha and the young woman who gave him lotus flowers to offer to the
Enlightened Master Dipankara.
  Siuan Tsi Po Yuan King (T. 200); Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190);
Purnamukhavadanasakata; Jataka (Kh. 10); Cheng King (T. 154).


                    Chapter Thirty-Seven: A New Faith
   Nanda and Rahula join the sangha. King Suddhodana criticizes the Buddha for
allowing Rahula to become a monk. The Buddha gives a discourse on politics
and the way of virtue.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 1; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The king’s words to the Buddha, “Master, I suffered unbelievably when you
abandoned home to become a monk... the pain is like a knife cutting into my
skin, flesh, bone, and marrow...” have been taken almost verbatim from Vin. Mv.
Kh. 1.


                  Chapter Thirty-Eight: O, Happiness!
  Six princes of the Sakya clan leave home and ask to be ordained along with a
barber. The Buddha spends the retreat season at Bamboo Forest. Venerable
Baddhiya tastes the joys of the Dharma. Mahakassapa is ordained.
  Vin. Cv. Kh. 7; Ud. 11, 10; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
  Baddhiya’s experiencing the joys of the Dharma are mentioned in Vin. Cv.
Kh. 7.


               Chapter Thirty-Nine: Waiting for Daybreak
   The merchant Sudatta goes to meet the Buddha before daylight. Sudatta
invites Sariputta to go with him to Savatthi in order to prepare for the Buddha’s
arrival to teach the Dharma in the kingdom of Kosala.
   Vin. Cv. Kh. 6; S. X, 8; Tsa 592 and 593.
   Sudatta’s first encounter with the Buddha is described in Vin. Cv. Kh. 6.


                 Chapter Forty: Cover the Land in Gold
   Sudatta purchases Prince Jeta’s grove in order to build a monastery for the
bhikkhus. Venerable Sariputta returns to accompany the Buddha. The Buddha
teaches the Dharma to the Licchavi princes.
   Vin. Cv. Kh. 6; S. X, 8; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).


         Chapter Forty-One: Has Anyone Seen My Mother?
   The Buddha spends the retreat season at Jetavana. Other religious sects
disagree with the Buddha concerning the subject of love.
   Piyajatika Sutta (M. 87), Tchong 216 (T. 26).


              Chapter Forty-Two: Love Is Understanding
  King Pasenadi visits the Buddha and receives teaching about Love and
Understanding.
  Piyajatika Sutta (M. 87); Ud. VI, 4; Metta Sutta (Sn. I, 8), Tchong 216 (T. 26).
  The passage in which the Buddha speaks to the king about a young prince, a
small snake, a spark of fire, and a young monk is found in S. III, 1.


           Chapter Forty-Three: Everyone’s Tears Are Salty
  The Buddha invites the nightsoil carrier, Sunita, to join the sangha of
bhikkhus. King Pasenadi comes to ask the Buddha why he has accepted an
untouchable into the sangha.
  Fo Pen Hing Tsi King (T. 190); Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King (T. 187);
Lalitavistara.


          Chapter Forty-Four: The Elements Will Recombine
   Nanda misses his betrothed. The Buddha returns to Vesali for the retreat
season. King Suddhodana, on his deathbed, asks the Buddha to return. The
Buddha speaks to his father about birth and death and assists him in choosing a
successor. After the funeral, Queen Pajapati asks to be ordained. The Buddha
refuses her request.
   Ud. III, 2; Vin. Cv. Kh. 10; A. VII, 51; Fang Kouang Ta Tchouang Yen King
(T. 187); Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The Buddha’s refusal to allow Gotami to be ordained is mentioned in Vin. Cv.
Kh. 10 and in T. 1428. Additional references can be found in A. VII, 51 and A.
VIII, 53.


                  Chapter Forty-Five: Opening the Door
   Mahapajapati and women comrades demonstrate their intention and ability to
lead the homeless life. Eight Rules are created as a prerequisite for women to be
ordained.
   Ud. III, 2; Vin. Cv. Kh. 10; A. VIII, 51-53; Tchong 116 (T. 26); Tchong 130
(T. 26); Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428); Wou Fen Liu (T. 1421).
   Detailed accounts of Mahapajapati and her women comrades’ efforts to be
accepted into the sangha are recorded in Vin. Cv. Kh. 10; T. 1428 and T. 1421.


          Chapter Forty-Six: A Handful of Simsapa Leaves
   The Buddha deals with Bhikkhu Malukyaputta and esoteric questions. After
dispute and division in the sangha at Kosambi, the Buddha goes to the forest
alone. He creates the six principles for community harmony.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 10; Upakkilesa Sutta (M. 128); Culamalukya Sutta (M. 63);
Tchong 205 (T. 26); Tchong 221 (T. 26); S. 56, 31; Tsa 404; Fo Chouo Tsien Yu
King (T. 94); Kulagosinga Sutta (M. 31); Kosambiya Sutta (M. 48); Tchong 72
(T. 26).
   The episode with Bhikkhu Malukyaputta can be found in M. 63 and Tchong
221 (T. 26). Division in the sangha is recorded in Vin. Mv. Kh. 10 and M. 128.
The harmonious community life of Anuruddha, Kimbila and Nandiya is
recounted in M. 128, Tchong 72 (T. 26), and Vin. Mv. Kh. 10.


              Chapter Forty-Seven: Follow the Dharma
   The Buddha spends the retreat season in Rakkhuta Forest and befriends an
elephant matriarch. The Buddha returns to Savatthi. His senior disciples ask him
how to receive the bhikkhus from Kosambi.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 10; Ud. IV, 5; Upakkilesa Sutta (M. 128).
   The Buddha’s befriending of the elephant is recorded in Vin. Mv. Kh. 10.
Look also at Ud. IV, 5. The repentance and reconciliation among the bhikkhus
from Kosambi is recorded in Vin. Mv. Kh. 10.


           Chapter Forty-Eight: Covering Mud with Straw
  The Buddha’s senior disciples establish the Seven Practices of Reconciliation.
  Vin. Mv. Kh. 10; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
  The Seven Practices of Reconciliation are the final items in the precepts of the
bhikkhus, in both the Southern and Northern traditions.


                  Chapter Forty-Nine: Earth’s Lessons
   Rahula recounts for Svasti how the precepts were developed. The Buddha
encounters a farmer who accuses the bhikkhus of eating without working. The
Buddha teaches Rahula concerning Right Speech, Right Mindfulness, and the
Four Limitless Meditations.
   Ambalatthikarahulovada Sutta (M. 61); Maharahulovada Sutta (M. 62); Vin.
Sv. Para. I; A. VIII, 11; Kasibharadvaya Sutta (Sn. I, 4); Cularahulovada Sutta
(M. 147); Tchong 14 (T. 26); Tsa 897 (T. 99); Tchong 200 (T. 26).
   The farmer’s accusations that the Buddha does not plow or sow seeds is taken
from Sn. 1, 4 and S. VII, 11. The Buddha’s instruction to Rahula can be found in
M. 62, M. 147, Tseng 17, 1 (T. 125), and Tchong 200 (T. 26).


                     Chapter Fifty: A Handful of Bran
   There is a famine in Vejanra. The Buddha speaks to Sariputta concerning how
to know when the precepts are complete. Svasti feels homesick. The Buddha
teaches Meghiya concerning the Four Establishments of Mindfulness.
   Vin. Sv. Para. 1; Ud. IV, 1; A. IX, 3; Tsa 897 (T. 99); Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The Buddha’s instruction to Meghiya can be found in Ud. IV, 1 and A. IX, 3.
According to the Southern Tradition, the complete precepts number 227 for
bhikkhus and 311 for bhikkhunis. According to the Northern Tradition which
relies most on Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428) of the Dharmagupta tradition, there are
250 precepts for bhikkhus and 358 for bhikkhunis.


               Chapter Fifty-One: The Treasure of Insight
   Rahula receives full ordination. The Buddha gives Rahula teaching
concerning contemplation of the eighteen realms of existence. The Buddha
delivers the Sutra on Knowing the Better Way to Live Alone. The Buddha
teaches about Compassion to a group of children. The Buddha lifts a lotus before
the community as a means of opening them to the direct experience of life’s
wonders.
   S. XXI, 10; Metta Sutta (Sn. I, 8); Ud. V, 4; Bhaddekaratta Sutta (M. 131);
Ananda Bhaddekaratta Sutta (M. 132); Mahakaccana Bhaddekaratta Sutta (M.
133); Tseng 49, 10 (T. 125); Tchong 165, 166, 167 (T. 26); and Fo Chouo Tsouen
Chang King (T. 77).
   The meeting between the Buddha and a group of children harming crabs can
be found in the Metta Sutta, Sn. I, 8. The Sutra on Knowing the Better Way to
Live Alone is from M. 131. Also look at M. 132, M. 133, Tchong 165, 166, 167
(T. 26), and T. 77.


                   Chapter Fifty-Two: Fields of Merit
   The Buddha mediates and brings to resolution the conflict between Sakya and
Koliya, and then spends the retreat season in Kapilavatthu. The Buddha returns
to Vulture Peak. He suggests a new way of sewing bhikkhus’ robes to Ananda.
Lay disciple Lady Visakha pays a visit. The senior disciples suggest that Ananda
serve as the Buddha’s full-time attendant, and they ask the Buddha to return to
Savatthi every year for the retreat season.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 8; Ud. VIII, 8; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The Buddha’s idea to sew robes as fields of merit is mentioned in Vin. Mv.
Kh. 8. Lay disciple Lady Visakha is mentioned in Vin. Mv. Kh. 8, Ud. VIII, 8
and T. 1428.


        Chapter Fifty-Three: Dwelling in the Present Moment
   The Buddha delivers the Satipatthana Sutta. He converts Angulimala.
   Satipatthana Sutta (M. 10); Mahasatipatthana Sutta (D. 22); Angulimala Sutta
(M. 86); Nian Tan King (Tchong 81); Nian Chu King (Tchong 98) (T. 26); Tseng
12, 1 (T. 125); Yang Kiue Mo Lo King (T. 120).
   The Satipatthana Sutta is transmitted in three documents: M. 10, Tchong 98,
and Tseng 12, 1 (T. 125). It is the fundamental sutra on meditation. M. 10 is from
the Theravada tradition, Tchong 98 is from the Sarvastivada tradition, and Tseng
12, 1 is of the Mahasanghika tradition. The story of Angulimala is told in M. 86.
In the Chinese canon, in addition to T. 120, there are several other sutras which
mention Angulimala.


               Chapter Fifty-Four: Dwell in Mindfulness
   The intellectual Upali abandons the Nigantha sect in order to follow the
teaching of the Buddha. Jetavana Monastery is disturbed by false accusations.
   Upali Sutta (M. 56); Lalitavistara; Tchong 133 (T. 26); Fo Chouo Fou Yao
King (T. 186).


         Chapter Fifty-Five: Appearance of the Morning Star
   The Buddha cares for a bhikkhu who has dysentery. Bhikkhuni Dhammadinna
delivers a discourse on Emptiness to lay disciples Visakha and Sudatta and is
praised by the Buddha. The stories of Bhikkhunis Patacara and Uppalavanna are
recounted.
   Vin. Mv. Kh. 8; AV. 123-124; Culavedalla Sutta (M. 44); Tchong 210 (T. 26);
Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   Patacara’s poem can be found in the Therigatha. The lay disciple named
Visakha who listened to Bhikkhuni Dhammadinna’s discourse was a male
disciple and not Lady Visakha. Uppalavanna’s story is recounted in T. 1428. See
also Thig.


Book Three

            Chapter Fifty-Six: Full Awareness of Breathing
  The Buddha delivers the Sutra on the Full Awareness of Breathing.
Angulimala is beaten by an angry mob.
  Anapanasati Sutta (M. 118); Angulimala Sutta (M. 86); Tsa 1077 (T. 125);
Tseng 17, 1 and 38, 6 (T. 125); Fo Chouo Ta Nyan Pan Cheou Yi King (T. 602),
Tsa 1077 (T. 125).
  The general outline of the Sutra on the Full Awareness of Breathing in this
chapter is taken from M. 118. The version in T. 602 of the Chinese canon is not
so clear or precise. The attack on Angulimala is recounted in M. 86.


            Chapter Fifty-Seven: The Raft Is Not the Shore
   The Buddha delivers the Simile of the Snake Sutra. Venerable Bhanda gives a
Dharma talk at the bhikkhunis’ monastery. The Buddha ordains the young
untouchable woman Prakriti.
   S. LIV, 9; Alagaddupama Sutta (M. 22); Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428); Tchong 200
(T. 26).
   The examples of catching a snake and using a raft to cross the river, as well as
the Buddha’s teaching that one must study and practice intelligently, unbound by
narrow views and ignorance, like the man who carries the raft around on his
head, can all be found in M. 22. The story about Bhanda is taken from T. 1428.


          Chapter Fifty-Eight: A Handful of Precious Earth
  Children offer a handful of earth to the Buddha. The Buddha tells them the
past-life story of Vesvantara. The physician Jivaka asks the Buddha about
vegetarianism.
  Jivaka Sutta (M. 55); Avadanasakata; Purnamukhavadanasataka.
  Jivaka’s questions about vegetarianism are from M. 55.


                Chapter Fifty-Nine: The Net of Theories
   Bhikkhuni Subha is almost violated by a strange man. The Buddha delivers
the Brahmajala Sutta. Venerable Moggallana explains in brief the philosophies
of the various contemporary religious sects to Venerable Svasti.
   Samannaphala Sutta (D. 2); Brahmajala Sutta (D. 1); Tch’ang 21 (T. 1); Thig.
   To find the story of bhikkhuni Subha, read Thig. The names and ages of the
leaders of the various religious sects of the time are recorded in D. 2, and here
and there in many other sutras. Their philosophies are mentioned in D. 1.


                  Chapter Sixty: Lady Visakha’s Grief
   The Buddha discusses with Sonadanda the fundamental characteristics
necessary to make a brahman. Lady Visakha expresses a wish for many children
and grandchildren. Venerable Ananda promises to plant a bodhi tree at Jetavana.
   Vasettha Sutta (M. 98); Ud. VIII, 8; Tch’ang 22 (T. 1); Sonadanda Sutta (D.
4).
   The encounter with Sonadanda is recounted in D. 4, as well as mentioned in
M. 98. The story of Lady Visakha’s drenched hair is from Ud. VIII, 8.


                  Chapter Sixty-One: The Lion’s Roar
   The Buddha gives the teaching on dependent co-arising. The young woman
Cinca falsely accuses the Buddha. The Buddha delivers the Sutra on the Lion’s
Roar.
   Ud. IV, 8; S. XII, 2; Culasihanada Sutta (M. 11); A. IV, 33; Mahanidana Sutta
(D. 15); Yuan K’i King (T. 124); Lalitavistara; Tchong 97 (T. 26); Tsa 684 (T.
125); Jou Lai Che Tseu Heou King (T. 835); Fo Chouo Fou Yao King (T. 186).
   Dependent co-arising is taught in many sutras. The substance of the Sutra on
the Lion’s Roar in this chapter has been taken from M. 11.


                 Chapter Sixty-Two: Sariputta’s Roar
   Venerable Sariputta is falsely accused out of jealousy. The Buddha delivers
the Kalama Sutra.
   Kalama Sutta (A. III, 65); Sariputtasihanada Sutta (A. IX, 11).
   The incident of jealousy leading to Sariputta being falsely accused can be
found in A. IX, 11. The Kalama Sutra is like the charter of Buddhist teaching
concerning freedom of thought. It is also called Kesamutta Sutta. The story of
Kokalika is found in S. 6, 1, 10.


             Chapter Sixty-Three: All the Way to the Sea
  The Buddha waits for a farmer to eat before beginning his Dharma talk. The
Buddha speaks about a piece of driftwood floating towards the sea. Svasti is
asked to guide and look after a young buffalo tender who joins the sangha.
  S. XXXV, 200.
  The Buddha’s words about the piece of driftwood are taken from S. XXXV,
200.


         Chapter Sixty-Four: The Round of Birth and Death
   The Buddha delivers the Sutra on the Eight Realizations of the Great Beings.
Venerable Vakkali dies. The Buddha teaches about beginninglessness and
endlessness.
   A. VIII, 30; S. XII, 15; S. XXII, 87; S. VX, 1; Tchong 74 (T. 26); Tsa 1265 (T.
125) ; Tseng 26, 10 (T. 125); Tseng 42, 6 (T. 125); Fo Chouo A Na Liu Pa Nien
King (T. 46); Fo Chouo Pa Ta Jen Kiao King (T. 779).
   The Eight Realizations of the Great Beings in this chapter are taken from T.
779. They are also mentioned in several other sutras, both Southern and
Northern. The story about Venerable Vakkali’s death is recounted in S. XXII, 87,
in Tsa 47 (T. 125), and Tseng 19 (T. 99). The Buddha’s thoughts concerning
beginninglessness and endlessness at the end of this chapter are from S. XV, 1.
The parable of the arrows and the Buddha’s teaching on feelings are found in S.
XXXVI, 1, 6. His teaching concerning the contemplation on feelings at the
moment of dying is taken from S. XXXVI, 1, 7.


             Chapter Sixty-Five: Neither Full nor Empty
   The Buddha teaches concerning emptiness, birthlessness, and deathlessness.
   S. XXXV, 85; Culasunnata Sutta (M. 121); Mahasunnata Sutta (M. 122); Tsa
232 (T. 99); Fo Chouo Wou Yun Kiai K’ong King (T. 102); Tao Hing Pan Jo
King (T. 224); Pan Jo Po Lo Mi To Sin King (T. 251); Ta Fang Kouang Fo Houa
Yen King (T. 278).
   The section in which Ananda asks about the nature of the world and the
Buddha’s response are taken from S. XXXV, 84. The section in which Ananda
asks what the Buddha means when he says that all the dharmas are empty, is
taken from S. XXXV, 85. The example given by the Buddha of the Dharma hall,
the sangha of bhikkhus, the market, water buffaloes, and the village, is taken
from M. 121, whose contents are basically the same as Tsa 232 (T. 99). The
following explanations are all based on the principle of interdependence and
emptiness of self. All the ideas in this chapter concerning birthlessness,
deathlessness, interpenetration, and interbeing spoken of in the Prajñaparamita
Sutra and the Avatamsaka Sutra are the natural and inevitable expansion of the
Buddha’s original teaching on dependent co-arising, selflessness, and emptiness.


                   Chapter Sixty-Six: Four Mountains
   The Buddha delivers the Ullambana Sutra on filial piety. The Buddha
encourages King Pasenadi to devote more time to spiritual practice in his old
age. The Buddha tells a story about blind men and an elephant.
   Ud. VI, 4; S. III, 25; Fo Chouo Yu Lan Pen King (T. 685); Fo Chouo Hiao
Tseu King (T. 687); Fo Chouo Fou Mou Ngen Nan Pao King (T. 684).
   The Yu Lan Sutra does not exist in the Pali canon. To find the story of the four
mountains, see S. III, 3, 5. The Vietnamese Emperor Tran Thai Tong was
inspired by this sutra to write his piece “Four Mountains, Preface and Gathas,”
in the work Khoa Hu Luc (Treatise on Emptiness). The story about the blind
men and the elephant is from Ud. VI, 4.


                    Chapter Sixty-Seven: Ocean Poet
   Venerable Punna asks the Buddha’s permission to spread the Dharma in a
region that is known for its violence and lack of civilization. The Buddha talks
about the eight characteristics of the sea.
   Punnovada Sutta (M. 145); S. XXXV, 63-64; Tsa 311 (T. 99); A. VIII, 19; Fa
Hai King (T. 34); Fo Chouo Hai Pa To King (T. 35).
   The eight characteristics of the sea are recounted in A. VIII, 19. Also look at
T. 35.


             Chapter Sixty-Eight: Three Wondrous Gates
   The Buddha speaks about the problem of division in the sangha. He delivers
the Sutra on the Dharma Seal. The two venerables Yamelu and Tekula ask
permission to translate the sutras into classical meter but are refused by the
Buddha.
   Vin. Cv. Kh. 5; Samagama Sutta (M. 104); Pasadika Sutta (D. 29); Tsa 80 (T.
99); Fo Chouo Tcheng Fa Yin King (T. 103); Fo Chouo Fa Yin King (T. 104).
   The Buddha’s words concerning the problem of division are taken from M.
104. The contents of the Sutra on the Dharma Seal used in this chapter are taken
from T. 104. The two venerables asking permission to translate the sutras is
mentioned in Vin. Cv. Kh. 5.


           Chapter Sixty-Nine: Where Will the Buddha Go?
   Some ascetics ask the Buddha philosophical questions but are met by silence.
Thanks to Venerable Anuruddha, the Buddha receives a new name, the
Tathagata.
   S. XLIV, 2; Aggivaccha Sutta (M. 72); Alagaddupama Sutta (M. 22); A. X,
95; S. XIV, 10; Tsa 106 (T. 99); Iti IV, 13.
   The incident of the Buddha refusing to answer the ascetic Uttiya’s questions is
taken from A. X, 95. The incident concerning the ascetic Vacchagotta is taken
from S. XIV, 10. The incident with Anuruddha is mentioned in S. XLIV, 2.
Concerning the title of Tathagata, look at M. 22 and M. 72; Iti. IV, 13, and A. IV,
23.


                Chapter Seventy: The Quail and the Falcon
   Rahula tells Svasti about Bhikkhu Vangisa, a poet. The Buddha compares the
six sense organs to an ocean filled with sea monsters and whirlpools. The
Buddha tells the story of the falcon and the quail, suggesting that bhikkhus be
protected by mindfulness. Svasti recalls the story of Bhikkhu Isidatta and
Layperson Citta. The Buddha suggests a tender way to deal with weak members
of the sangha that will preserve the remaining good seeds in them. There is a
conversation between the Buddha and Kesi, a horse trainer. The warrior
Rohitassa asks the Buddha how to get out of the world of birth and death.
   Tsa 1208-1221 (T. 99); S. VIII 1, 1-12; S. XLVII, 1, 6; Tsa 24, 15 (T. 99); S.
SLI, 2-3; Tsa 570 (T. 99); Tchong 194 (T. 26); M. 65.
   The story of Vangisa is told in Tsa 1208-1221 (T. 99) and Tchong 192 (T. 26).
The story of Isidatta is found in S. XLI, 2- 3, and Tsa 570 (T. 99). The
conversation between the Buddha and the horse trainer is found in A. IV, 12,
110. The story of Rohitassa is seen in Tseng 43, 1 (T. 125), A. VI, 45, Tsa 1307,
and S. II, 3, 6.


          Chapter Seventy-One: The Art of Stringing a Sitar
   The Buddha encourages Venerable Sona to take good care of his health.
Jivaka informs the Buddha about Venerable Devadatta’s and the Prince
Ajatasattu’s ambitions. Devadatta asks the Buddha to transfer the leadership of
the sangha to Devadatta.
   Ud. V, 6; Vin. Mv. Kh. 5; A. VI, 55; Vin. Cv. Kh. 7; Tchong 123 (T. 26), Tsa
254 (T. 99); Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The Buddha’s questions to Sona about stringing a sitar are mentioned in Vin.
Mv. Kh. 5. Also see A. VI, 55. Devadatta’s request to be given the leadership of
the sangha is recounted in T. 1428 and Vin. Cv. Kh. 7


                 Chapter Seventy-Two: Quiet Resistance
  Devadatta proposes five new rules and organizes an independent sangha. King
Bimbisara abdicates his throne in favor of his son, Prince Ajatasattu. The
Buddha and his sangha do not attend the new king’s coronation.
  Vin. Cv. Kh. 7; Vin. Sv. Sangh. 10; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
  Devadatta’s proposal for five new rules and his setting up an independent
sangha are recorded in Vin. Cv. Kh. 7. See also Vin. Sv. Sangh. 10. Prince
Ajatasattu’s attempted assassination of King Bimbisara is recorded in Vin. Cv.
Kh. 7 and T. 1428.


                 Chapter Seventy-Three: Hidden Rice
  The first attempt on the Buddha’s life is unsuccessful. Venerables Sariputta
and Moggallana leave for Gayasisa. The Buddha meets with Queen Videhi.
  Vin. Cv. Kh. 7; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
  The attempt on the Buddha’s life and the departure of Venerables Sariputta
and Moggallana for Gayasisa can be found in Vin. Cv. Kh. 7 and T. 1428.


          Chapter Seventy-Four: Cry of the Elephant Queen
   Venerables Sariputta and Moggallana lead four hundred bhikkhus back to the
Buddha’s sangha. The Buddha receives an injury in a second attempt on his life.
The Buddha pacifies the elephant Nagagiri and thus survives the third attempt on
his life.
   Vin. Cv. Kh. 7; Sseu Fen Liu (T. 1428).
   The return of bhikkhus under the guidance of the two elder disciples is
recorded in Vin. Cv. Kh. 7. The hurling of a boulder and the releasing of a
violent elephant in attempts to kill the Buddha are recorded in Vin. Cv. Kh. 7 and
T. 1428.


                Chapter Seventy-Five: Tears of Happiness
    The Buddha departs from Magadha and returns to Savatthi for the retreat
season. The Buddha delivers the Singala Sutta. Lay disciple Sudatta falls gravely
ill. The Buddha creates the Eight Observances for the Laity. Venerables Sariputta
and Ananda visit Sudatta and offer him teaching.
    Magandiya Sutta (M. 75); Culadhammasammadana Sutta (M. 45); Singala
Sutta (D. 31); Anathapindikovada Sutta (M. 143); Tchong 135 (T. 26); Tsa 1031
and 1032 (T. 99); Tseng 51, 8 (T. 125); Fo Chouo Che Kia Yue Viet Lieou Fang
Li King (T. 16); Fo Chouo Pa Koan Tchai King (T. 89).
    For the section on sense pleasures and the leper roasting himself on a fire in
the forest, look at M. 75. The four kinds of happiness are described in M. 45.
The episode of Sudatta’s tears when he listens to the two venerables teach the
Dharma is taken from M. 143. See also Tchong 28 (T. 26).


              Chapter Seventy-Six: The Fruits of Practice
   War erupts between Kosala and Magadha. Queen Mallika passes away. The
Buddha speaks to King Pasenadi about politics and virtue. The Buddha returns
to Vulture Peak. Jivaka arranges for King Ajatasattu to meet the Buddha. The
Buddha delivers the Sutra on the Fruits of a Bhikkhu’s Practice.
   S. XLVIII, 41; Kutadanta Sutta (D. 5); Samannaphala Sutta (D. 2); Tch’ang 27
(T. 1).
   King Ajatasattu’s invasion of Kosala is recorded in S. III, 14-15. The
Buddha’s suggestions concerning how the law should deal with conflict and
crime is taken from D. 5, although in this sutra the Buddha was not speaking to
either King Pasenadi or King Bimbisara but rather to a brahmana named
Kutadanta. Jivaka’s invitation to King Ajatasattu to go meet the Buddha is
spoken of in D. 2 and Tch’ang 27 (T. 1).


               Chapter Seventy-Seven: Stars in Your Eyes
   The Buddha returns to Savatthi for the retreat season. King Pasenadi praises
the Buddha and the Sangha. Upon his return to Vulture Peak, the Buddha learns
of the deaths of King Pasenadi and Venerable Moggallana.
   Dhammacatiya Sutta (M. 89), Tchong 213 (T. 26).
   King Pasenadi’s visit to the Buddha and his praises are recorded in both M. 89
and Tchong 213 (T. 26).


        Chapter Seventy-Eight: Two Thousand Saffron Robes
  Venerable Devadatta repents. King Ajatasattu explores the idea of invading
Vajji. The Buddha delivers his talk on the seven practices to assure the strength
and continuation of the sangha. Venerable Sariputta praises the Buddha. The
Buddha spends the retreat season in Beluvagamaka village and falls seriously ill.
  Mahaparinibbana Sutta (D. 16); Tch’ang 2 (T. 1); Fo Pan Ni Yuan King (T. 5);
Mahavastu.
  King Ajatasattu’s sending an envoy to the Buddha to ask his counsel
concerning his plans to invade Vajji is mentioned in D. 16 and Tch’ang 2 (T. 1).
The section about the people of Vesali asking the Buddha to come from
Rajagaha to help them during the plague is recorded in Mahavastu.


         Chapter Seventy-Nine: Sandalwood Tree Mushrooms
   The Buddha speaks about the nature of the Three Gems. The Buddha receives
news that Venerable Sariputta has died in Nala. The Buddha leaves Vesali and
crosses the Ganga to head north. He is offered his last meal by Cunda. The
Buddha enters the forest of sal trees in Kusinara.
   S. XLVII, 1, 9; Tsa 638 (T. 99); Mahaparinibbana Sutta (D. 16); Tch’ang 2 (T.
1); Fo Pan Ni Yuan King (T. 5).
   All the details in this chapter have been taken from D. 16 and T. 5.


                        Chapter Eighty: Be Diligent!
  The Buddha praises Venerable Ananda. Ascetic Subhadda is the last person
ordained by the Buddha. The Buddha passes into Nirvana.
  Mahaparinibbana Sutta (D. 16); Tch’ang 2 (T. 1); Fo Pan Ni Yuan King (T. 5).
  The details in this chapter were all taken from D. 6 and T. 5.


             Chapter Eighty-One: Old Path White Clouds
   The people of Kusinara offer the Buddha incense, flowers, and music.
Venerable Mahakassapa leads five hundred bhikkhus to the Buddha’s funeral.
Several delegations from different kingdoms receive relics of the Buddha to
place in stupas. Mahakassapa organizes a council to compile all the precepts and
sutras in Rajagaha. Venerable Svasti returns to Uruvela and gazes at the shore of
the Neranjara River and the white clouds in the sky.
   Mahaparinibbana Sutta (D. 16); Tch’ang 2 (T. 1); Fo Pan Ni Yuan King (T. 5).
   Details concerning the Buddha’s funeral and the dividing of his relics are
taken from D. 16 and T. 5.
Sanskrit Equivalents of Pali Names and Places




Shantum Seth, a student of Thich Nhat Hanh, organizes pilgrimages, “In the
Footsteps of the Buddha,” each winter in India and Nepal. The group visits the
sites associated with the Buddha’s life, going at a pace slower than tourists
usually do, which allows the pilgrim to be mindful, have discussions, and listen
to stories of the Buddha’s life and teachings, many from Old Path White Clouds.
It is also an opportunity to explore and understand the subtleties of Indian life
that have changed little since the time of the Buddha. For further information
and a free brochure, please contact:
                                     Shantum Seth
                                   309-B Sector 15 A
                                     Noida 201301
                                         India
                          Email: shantum@ivpas.unv.ernet.in
Parallax Press publishes books and tapes on Buddhism and related subjects for
contemporary readers. We carry all books by Thich Nhat Hanh. For a copy of
our free catalog, please write to:
                                     Parallax Press


  P. O. Box 7355
Berkeley, CA 94707
 www.parallax.org


The Sutra on the Eight
   Realizations of
  the Great Beings
     Commentary by Thich Nhat Hanh
                   e
                       DHANET
                 B   UD      '     S
                   BO                   Y
                        O K LIB R A R
        E-mail: bdea@buddhanet.net
        Web site: www.buddhanet.net
Buddha Dharma Education Association Inc.


          The Sutra On
The Eight Realizations
  Of The Great Beings
Translated from the Chinese with Commentary by
         Thich Nhat Hanh
      Translated from the Vietnamese by
   Diem Thanh Truong and Carole Melkonian


                    ©1987 by Thich Nhat Hanh
                          All Rights Reserved
    Plum Village, Meyrac 47120 Loubes-Bernac, France
Thich Nhat Hanh is a Buddhist monk and social activist.
He served as Chair of the Vietnamese Buddhist Peace Del-
egation to the Paris Peace Accords and was nominated by
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. for the Nobel Peace Prize. His
many books include Being Peace, Peace Is Every Step, and
The Miracle Of Mindfulness.
                      Care Of Dharma Books
Dharma books contain the teachings of the Buddha; they have the power to
protect against lower rebirth and to point the way to liberation. Therefore,
they should be treated with respect – kept off the floor and places where
people sit or walk – and not stepped over. They should be covered or
protected for transporting and kept in a high, clean place separate from
more “mundane” materials. Other objects should not be placed on top of
Dharma books and materials. Licking the fingers to turn pages is considered
bad form (and negative karma). If it is necessary to dispose of Dharma
materials, they should be burned rather than thrown in the trash. When
burning Dharma, first recite Om, Ah, Hung. Then, visualize the letters of
the texts (to he burned) absorbing into the Ah, and that absorbing into you.
After that, you can burn the texts.
These considerations may also be kept in mind for Dharma artwork, as well
as the written teachings and artwork of other religions.
                                       3


                    Contents
The Sutra On The Eight Realizations
        Of The Great Beings . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .  6
Commentary on the Sutra              ...........................            10
Practicing and Observing the Sutra                    ...........           26
Afterword   .....................................................           27
Verse of Transference of Merit                 ..................           28
                                 4


5

            The Sutra On The Eight
  Realizations Of The Great Beings
     Translated from Chinese with Commentary By
                      Thich Nhat Hanh
Wholeheartedly, day and night, a disciple of the Buddha
should recite and meditate on the Eight Realizations dis-
covered by the Mahasattvas, the Great Beings.
The First Realization is the awareness that the world is
impermanent. All political regimes are subject to fall; all
things composed of the four elements1 are empty and con-
tain the seeds of suffering. Human beings are composed of
the five skandhas, aggregates2, and are without a separate
self. They are always in the process of change – constantly
being born and constantly dying. They are empty of self,
without sovereignty. The mind is the source of all confu-
sion, and the body is the forest of all impure actions. If we
mediate on these facts, we can gradually be released from
samsara, the round of birth and death.
  1.   Earth, air, water, fire
  2.   Form, feeling, perception, mental formations, consciousness
                                     6


The Second Realization is the awareness that more
desire brings more suffering. All hardships in daily life
arise from greed and desire. Those with little desire and
ambition are able to relax their bodies and minds, free
from entanglement.
The Third Realization is that the human mind is always
searching for possessions and never feels fulfilled. This
causes impure actions to ever increase. Bodhisattvas how-
ever, always remember the principle of having few desires.
They live a simple life in peace in order to practice the
Way, and consider the realization of perfect understanding
as their only career.
The Fourth Realization is the awareness of the extent to
which laziness is an obstacle to practice. For this reason,
we must practice diligently to destroy the unwholesome
mental factors, which bind us, and to conquer the four
kinds of Mara3, in order to free ourselves from the prisons
of the five aggregates and the three worlds4.
  3.  Unwholesome mental factors, five aggregates, death, distractions
      (e.g. fantasies or forgetfulness)
  4.  World of desire and passion, the world of form (without desire
      and passion), the world of formlessness (only mental functioning).
                                       7


The Fifth Realization is the awareness that ignorance is
the cause of the endless round of birth and death. There-
fore, Bodhisattvas always remember to listen and learn in
order to develop their understanding and eloquence. This
enables them to educate living beings and bring them to
the realm of great joy.
The Sixth Realization is the awareness that poverty cre-
ates hatred and anger, which creates a vicious cycle of neg-
ative thoughts and activity. When practicing generosity,
Bodhisattvas consider everyone, friends and enemies
alike, as equal. They do not condemn anyone’s past wrong-
doing, nor do they hate those who are presently causing
harm.
The Seventh Realization is that the five categories of
desire5 lead to difficulties. Although we are in this world,
we should try not to be caught up in worldly matters. A
monk, for example, has in his possession three robes and
one bowl. He lives simply in order to practice the Way. His
precepts keep him free from attachment to worldly things,
and he treats everyone equally and with compassion.
  5.  Being wealthy, being beautiful, being ambitious, finding pleasure
      in eating, being lazy.
                                     8


The Eighth Realization is the awareness that the fire of
birth and death is raging, causing endless suffering every-
where. We should take the Great Vow to help everyone, to
suffer with everyone, and to guide all living beings to the
realm of great joy.
These Eight Realizations are the discoveries of Great
Beings, Buddhas and Bodhisattvas, who have diligently
practiced the way of compassion and understanding.
They have sailed the Dharmakaya6 boat to the shore of
Nirvana7, but they return to the ordinary world, having
abandoned the five desires, with their minds and hearts
directed toward the noble way, using these Eight
Realizations to help all living beings recognize the
suffering in this world. If the disciples of the Buddha
recite these Eight Realizations and meditate on them,
they will put an end to countless misunderstandings
and difficulties and progress toward enlightenment,
leaving behind the world of birth and death, dwelling
forever in peace.
  6.  The body of the teaching of awakening.
  7.  Liberation from birth and death.
                                    9


                      Commentary
                  The Origin Of The Sutra
This sutra was translated from Pali to Chinese by the
Parthian monk, An Shih Kao (Vietnamese: An The Cao), at
the Loyang city in China during the later Han Dynasty,
140–171 a.d. It is not certain if the Pali version is extant.
The ancient form of this sutra is the culmination of several
smaller works combined, just like the Forty-two Chapters
Sutra and The Sutra On The Six Paramitas. This sutra is
entirely in accord with both the Mahayana and Theravada
traditions.
Each of the eight items discussed can be a subject of
meditation, and each of these subjects can be further
divided. Although the form of the sutra is simple, its con-
tent is extremely profound and marvelous. The Sutra On
The Eight Realizations Of The Great Beings is not an ana-
lytical treatise. It is a realistic and effective approach to
meditation.
                                 10


                The Content Of The Sutra
The Sutra On The Eight Realizations Of The Great Beings
contains eleven essential subjects for meditation. I will dis-
cuss these subjects along with the eight realizations.
1.   The First Realization explains and clarifies the four
     basic subjects of Buddhist meditation:
     (a) impermanence, (b) suffering, (c) no-self, and
     (d) impurity. We must always remember and medi-
     tate on these four principles of reality. As mentioned
     in the sutra, if someone meditates on these facts, he
     or she will gradually gain release from samsara, the
     round of birth and death.
     a.   Impermanence – the impermanent nature of all
          things: From moment to moment, all things in
          this world, including human life, mountains and
          rivers, and political systems, are in constant
          transformation. This is called impermanence in
          each moment. Everything passes through a
          period of birth, maturity, transformation, and
          destruction. This destruction is called imperma-
          nence in each cycle. To see the impermanent
                              11


         nature of all things, we must examine this closely.
         Doing so will prevent us from being imprisoned
         by the things of this world.
   b.    Suffering – the emptiness of all things: The
         ancient people of India said that all things are
         composed of four elements: earth, water, air, and
         fire. Acknowledging this, Buddhas and Bodhisat-
         tvas understand that when there is a harmonious
         relationship among the four elements, there is
         peace. When the four elements are not in har-
         mony, there is suffering.
               Because all things are created by a combina-
         tion of these elements, nothing can exist inde-
         pendently or permanently. All things are
         impermanent. Consequently, when we are
         caught up in the nature of things, we also suffer
         from their impermanent nature. And since all
         things are empty, when we are caught by things,
         we also suffer from their emptiness. Awareness
         of the existence of suffering leads us to being able
         to practice the way of realization. This is the first
         of the Four Noble Truths8. When we lose aware-
8.  Suffering, The Cause of Suffering, The End of Suffering, The
    Eightfold path.
                                  12


   ness of and do not meditate on the existence of
   suffering in all things, we can easily be pushed
   around by passions and desires for worldly
   things, increasingly destroying our lives in the
   pursuit of these desires.
         Only by being aware of suffering can we find
   its cause, confront it directly, and eliminate it.
c. Selflessness – the nature of our bodies: Buddhism
   teaches that human beings are composed of five
   aggregates, called skandhas in Sanskrit. If the
   form created by the four elements is empty and
   without self, then human beings, created by the
   unification of the five skandhas, must also be
   empty and without self. Human beings are
   involved in a transformation process from second
   to second, minute to minute, continually experi-
   encing impermanence in each moment. By look-
   ing very deeply into the five skandhas, we can
   experience the selfless nature of our bodies, our
   passage through birth and death, and emptiness,
   thereby destroying the illusion that our bodies
   are permanent. In Buddhism, no-self is the most
   important subject for meditation. By meditating
   on no-self, we can break through the barrier
                        13


   between self and other. When we no longer are
   separate from the universe, a completely harmo-
   nious existence with the universe is created. We
   see that all other human beings exist in us and
   that we exist in all other human beings. We can
   see that the past and the future are contained in
   the present moment, and we can penetrate and
   be completely liberated from the cycle of birth
   and death.
        Modern science has also discovered the
   truth of the selfless nature of all things. The
   approach of British biologist Lyall Watson, for
   example, corresponds entirely with the principle
   of dependent-origination and no-self. Scientists
   who meditate continuously on the selfless nature
   of their own bodies and minds, as well as the self-
   less nature of all things, will one day easily attain
   enlightenment.
d. Impurity – the nature of our bodies and minds:
   Impurity means the absence of an immaculate
   state of being, one that is neither holy nor beauti-
   ful. From the psychological and physiological
   standpoint, human beings are impure. This is not
   negative or pessimistic, but an objective perspec-
                         14


           tive on human beings. If we examine the constit-
           uents of our bodies from the hair on our head to
           the blood, pus, phlegm, excretion, urine, the
           many bacteria dwelling in the intestines, and the
           many diseases waiting to develop, we can see
           that our bodies are quite impure and subject to
           decay. Our bodies also create the motivation to
           pursue the satisfaction of our desires and pas-
           sions. This is why the sutra regards the body as a
           place where misdeeds gather.
                Let us now consider our psychological state.
           Since we are unable to see the truth of imperma-
           nence, suffering, and the selfless nature of all
           things, your minds often become victims of greed
           and hatred, and we act wrongly. So the sutra says,
           “The mind is the source of all confusion.”
2.   “More desire brings more suffering” is the basis of the
     second realization. Most people define happiness as
     the satisfaction of all desires. There are five types of
     desire9. These desires are boundless but our ability to
     realize them is not, and unfulfilled desires always cre-
     ate suffering. When desires are only partially fulfilled,
  9.  See footnote 5
                                15


   we continue to pursue their complete fulfillment, and
   we create more suffering. Even when a desire is ful-
   filled, we suffer when its fulfillment terminates. It is
   only after we become completely exhausted from this
   incessant pursuit that we begin to realize the extent to
   which we are caught in the insatiable net of desires
   and passions. Then we can realize that true happiness
   is really a peaceful state of body and mind, and this
   can only exist when our desires are few. Having few
   desires and not seeking fulfillment through the pursuit
   of the five desires are great steps toward liberation.
3. Knowing how to feel satisfied with few possessions
   destroys desire and greed. This means being content
   with material conditions that allow us to be healthy
   and strong enough to practice the way. This is an
   effective way to cut through the net of passions and
   desires, attain a peaceful state of body and mind,
   have more to help others, and be free to realize the
   highest goal: the development of concentration and
   understanding to attain realization. Knowing how to
   feel satisfied with few possessions helps us to avoid
   buying unnecessarily and becoming part of an eco-
   nomic system that exploits others, and it enables us
                             16


     to decrease our involvement in the pollution of the
     environment.
4.   Diligent practice destroys laziness. After we cease
     looking for joy in desires and passions and know how
     to feel satisfied with few possessions, we must not be
     lazy, letting days and months slip by neglectfully.
     Great patience and diligence are needed continually
     to develop our concentration and understanding in an
     endeavor of self-realization. We must use all of our
     time to meditate on the four truths of impermanence,
     suffering, selflessness, and impurity, the first four sub-
     jects of meditation. We must penetrate deeply into the
     profound meaning of The Four Foundations of Mind-
     fulness10, practicing, studying, and meditating on the
     posture and cycles (becoming, maturing, transforma-
     tion, and destruction) of our bodies, as well as our
     feelings, sensations, mental formations, and con-
     sciousness. We should read sutras and other writings
     which explain meditation – correct sitting and con-
     trolling the breath, such as The Satipatthana Sutra
     and The Maha Prajna Paramita Heart Sutra. We have
     to follow the teaching of these sutras and practice
     them in an intelligent way, choosing the methods,
  10. Body, feeling, state of mind, mental contents
                                     17


   which best apply to our own situation. As necessary,
   we can modify the methods suggested in order to
   accommodate our own needs. Our energy must also
   be regulated until all the basic desires and passions –
   greed, anger, narrow-mindedness, arrogance, doubt,
   and preconceived ideas – are uprooted. At this time
   we will know that our bodies and minds are liberated
   from the imprisonment of birth and death, the five
   skandhas, and the three worlds.
5. Concentration and understanding destroy narrow-
   mindedness. Among the basic desires and passions,
   narrow-mindedness has the deepest roots. When
   these roots are loosened, all other desires and pas-
   sions – greed, anger, doubt, and preconceived ideas –
   are also uprooted. Knowing this, we can make a great
   effort to mediate on the truths of impermanence, no-
   self, and the dependent-origination of all things. Once
   the roots of ignorance are severed, we can not only
   liberate ourselves, but also teach others to break
   through the imprisonment of birth and death.
         The first four subjects of meditation are to help us
   attain liberation. The next four subjects have the aim of
   helping others attain liberation, thus clearly and solidly
   uniting Theravada and Mahayana Buddhist thought.
                               18


6. When practicing generosity, we should consider every-
   one equal. Some people think that they can only prac-
   tice generosity if they are wealthy. This is not true.
   Some people who are very wealthy do practice gener-
   osity, but many give alms with the aim of gaining
   merit, profiting, or pleasing others. People whose
   lives are grounded in compassion are seldom rich,
   because they share whatever they have with others.
   They are not willing to enrich their lives financially at
   the cost of other’s poverty. Many people misunder-
   stand the Buddhist expression “practicing generosity”
   to mean casually giving five or ten cents to a beggar
   on the street. In fact, the practice of generosity is even
   more beautiful than that. It is both modest and grand.
        Practicing generosity means to act in a way that
   will help equalize the difference between the wealthy
   and the impoverished. Whatever we do to ease
   human suffering and create social justice can be con-
   sidered practicing generosity. This is not to say that
   we engage in any political system. To engage in parti-
   san political action that leads to a power struggle
   among opposing parties and caused death and
   destruction is not what we mean by practicing gener-
   osity. Practicing generosity is the first of the six para-
   mitas11. Paramita means to help others reach the
                               19


   other shore, the shore of liberation from sickness,
   poverty, hunger, ignorance, desires and passions,
   birth and death.
         How can a person practicing “Knowing how to
   feel satisfied with few possessions” also practice gen-
   erosity? It is by living simply. Almost everyone who
   spends his or her life serving and helping others, sac-
   rificing themselves for the sake of humanity, lives
   simply. If they live their lives worrying about making
   money and gaining merit, how can they practice gen-
   erosity? Mahatma Gandhi lived a very simple life;
   nevertheless his merit in helping humanity and saving
   human beings was immeasurable. There are thou-
   sands of people among us who live very simply, while
   being very helpful to many, many others. They do not
   have as great a reputation as Gandhi, but their merit
   is no less than his. It is enough for us just to be a little
   more attentive and aware of the presence of people
   like these. They do not practice generosity by giving
   money, which they do not possess, but rather by giv-
   ing their time, energy, love, and care – their entire
   lives.
11. Giving, observing the percepts, diligent effort, endurance, concen-
    tration, and understanding
                                  20


         Practicing generosity in a Buddhist context means
   not to discriminate against anyone. Even though
   among the poor and destitute there are cruel persons
   and kind persons, we must not exclude the cruel ones
   from our practice. Because poverty brings anger and
   hatred, poor people are more inclined to create evil. As
   the sutra states, “Bodhisattvas consider everyone,
   friends and enemies alike, as equal. They do not con-
   demn anyone’s past wrongdoing, nor do they hate
   even those who are presently doing evil.” This
   expresses the spirit of Mahayana Buddhism. Poverty
   creates anger, hatred, and wrongdoing. If we teach
   Buddhist philosophy through lectures, but do not prac-
   tice generosity to ease the suffering of others, we have
   not yet attained the essence of Buddhism. We should
   practice generosity with compassion and not disdain,
   without discriminating against people who, because of
   their poverty, have caused anger and hatred.
7. While living in society, we should not be defiled by it.
   We must live in harmony with society in order to help
   others, without being caught by the five desires; living
   like the lotus flower which blooms in the mud and yet
   remains pure and unstained. Practicing the way of lib-
   eration does not mean avoiding society, but helping in
                             21


   it. Before our capacity to help becomes strong and
   solid, we may be defiled by living in society. For this
   reason, Bodhisattvas meditate on the detrimental
   nature of the five desires and firmly decide to live sim-
   ply in order to practice generosity without discrimina-
   tion. Thus, living in society and not being stained by
   it is to practice the six paramitas.
8. We should create in ourselves the firm decision to
   help others. We must make a deep and solemn vow to
   overcome the difficulties, dangers, and suffering that
   may occur while helping others. Since the suffering in
   society is limitless, the willingness and devotion to
   practice the way of helping others must also be limit-
   less. Thus, the Mahayana spirit is an endless source of
   energy which inspires us to practice generosity with-
   out discrimination. With the Mahayana spirit, we can
   withstand the many challenges and humiliations
   encountered in society and be able to continue to
   practice the Way. This will bring great happiness to
   others. Only with the Mahayana spirit can we realize
   the following topics taught by the Po Lun San Mi Lu
   (Vietnamese: Bao Vuong Tam Muoi Sastra):
                               22


1. While meditating on the body, do not hope or pray to
   be exempt from sickness. Without sickness, desires
   and passions can easily arise.
2. While acting in society, do not hope or pray not to
   have any difficulties. Without difficulties, arrogance
   can easily arise.
3. While meditating on the mind, do not hope or pray not
   to encounter obstacles. Without hindrances, present
   knowledge will not be challenged or broadened.
4. While working, do not hope or pray not to encounter
   obstacles. Without obstacles, the vow to help others
   will not deepen.
5. While developing a plan, do not hope or pray to
   achieve success easily. With easy success, arrogance
   can easily arise.
6. While interacting with others, do not hope or pray to
   gain personal profit. With the hope for personal gain,
   the spiritual nature of the encounter is diminished.
                             23


 7. While speaking with others, do not hope or pray not
    to be disagreed with. Without disagreement, self-
    righteousness can flourish.
 8. While helping others, do not hope or pray to be paid.
    With the hope of remuneration, the act of helping oth-
    ers will not be pure.
 9. If you see personal profit in an action, do not partici-
    pate in it. Even minimal participation will stir up
    desires and passions.
10. When wrongly accused, do not attempt to exonerate
    yourself. Attempting to defend yourself will create
    needless anger and animosity.
11. The Buddha spoke of sickness and suffering as effec-
    tive medicines; times of difficulties and accidents as
    times of freedom and realization; obstacles as libera-
    tion; the army of evil as the guards of the Dharma; dif-
    ficulties as required for success; the person who
    mistreats one as one's good friend; one's enemies as
    an orchard or garden; the act of doing someone a
                               24


     favor as base as the act of casting away a pair of old
     shoes; the abandonment of material possessions as
     wealth; and being wrongly accused as the source of
     strength to work for justice.
In the paragraph explaining the eighth realization, it
should be also be noted that the Mahayana Buddhist prac-
tice of the six paramitas is contained in this sutra:
1st Paramita – The Paramita of giving ................. 6th realization
2nd Paramita – The Paramita of observing
                the precepts .................... 2nd, 3rd, 7th realization
3rd Paramita – The Paramita of diligent effort ..... 4th realization
4th Paramita – The Paramita of patience .............. 8th realization
5th Paramita – The Paramita of concentration ...... 1st realization
6th Paramita – The Paramita of understanding ..... 5th realization
The style, content, and methodology of The Sutra On The
Eight Realizations are consistent and logical. It is a very
practical and concise sutra. But this discussion of the con-
tent is only intended to serve as a preliminary guideline.
To fully benefit from this sutra, we must also practice and
observe its teachings.
                                    25


           Practicing And Observing The Sutra
To practice and observe The Sutra On The Eight Realiza-
tions Of The Great Beings choose a time when your body
and mind are completely relaxed, for example after taking
a comfortable bath. You can begin by lighting a stick of
incense to give the room a pleasant fragrance. Then, take
the sutra and slowly read it to discover its deepest mean-
ings. Relate the words of the sutra to your life experiences.
It is through your own life experiences that you can under-
stand any sutra's content than through someone else’s
explanation of it.
Each time you sit in meditation, thoroughly examine each
subject of the sutra. The more you mediate on each sub-
ject, the more deeply you will discover the profound wis-
dom contained in the sutra. It would be helpful for you to
also read other sutras, such as The Anapanasati Sutta Of
Mindfulness On Breathing and The Satipatthana Sutta.
Both are profound and concise works which will comple-
ment The Sutra On The Eight Realizations. These two sutras
explain in practical detail how to progress step-by-step
towards realization. If you combine the method of follow-
ing and relaxing your breathing, as described in The Sutra
On The Eight Realizations; you will easily succeed in
achieving your aim of realizing your own self-nature.
                              26


                                 Afterword
The content of The Sutra On The Eight Realizations is
grounded in both Mahayana and Theravada viewpoints.
Please treasure this sutra. When I was seventeen, and in
my first year of novice studies at a Buddhist Monastery, I
had to study and memorize it. This enabled me to easily
combine the meaning of the Sutra with the meditation of
breath counting. From this period until now, 44 years have
passed and this Sutra is still an invaluable torch lighting
my path. Today I have the opportunity to present it to you.
I am grateful to this deep and miraculous Sutra. I join my
hands and respectfully recite, “Homage to the precious
Sutra On The Eight Realizations.”
In 1978, I asked the La Boi Press to give this Sutra away in
order to pray for those boat people who drowned in the
South China Sea and the Gulf of Siam during the prior
three years, and also for those who had the chance to sur-
vive so that they can find a new home somewhere in the
world. In 1987, I asked Parallax Press to publish an English
edition in order to make this Sutra available for western
readers and for refugees in the west.
The Vietnamese edition of this book was written by Thich Nhat Hanh in 1978 while
conducting a project to rescue boat people in the South China Sea.
Thich Nhat Hahn, Vietnamese Buddhist Master is one of the most beloved Buddhist
teacher, poet, and peace activist in the West and in 1967 was nominated for the
Nobel Peace Prize by Martin Luther King Jr.
                                          27


                         Verse Of Transference
         May the merit and virtue accrued from this work,
                      Adorn the Buddha’s Pure Lands.
                 Repaying four kinds of kindness above.
            And aiding those suffering in the oaths below.
                    May those who see and hear of this.
                    All bring forth the resolve for Bodhi.
                 And when this retribution body is over.
                     Be born together in ultimate bliss.
                                      Amita Buddha
                     Maha Sthama Prapta Avalokitesvara
                          Bodhisattva                 Bodhisattva
Note: One should recite this verse of transference to universally transfer all the merit and
virtue that accrue from sutra recitation or performance of any meritorious deeds (e.g. giving).
                                                 28


29

Ten Benefits From Printing Buddhist
 Sutras And Making Buddha-Images
 l. All evil karma made in the past, will either be wiped off
    and retribution created by past serious offence, reduced.
 2. Auspicious spirits constantly protect you and you do
    not have to experience the disasters of plagues, floods,
    fires, thieves, armed conflict, or imprisonment.
 3. Suffering inflicted by vengeful enemies, made in the
    past, will be avoided and the merit derived from print-
    ing sutras will allow these enemies to receive the bene-
    fits of Dharma, and thereby untie the bond of hatred.
 4. Evil ghosts and other yaksha-ghosts cannot encroach
    on you; poisonous snakes or man-eating beasts can-
    not harm you.
 5. You will have a peace of mind. During the day you
    will meet with no danger, and at night you will have
    no bad dreams. Your complexion will be healthy,
    smooth and moist. Your energy will be full of vitality.
    Your business will continue to prosper and meet with
    ultimate success.
                              30


 6. You will always have ample food and clothing. Your
    families will always be at peace, and your prosperity
    and blessings will constantly increase.
 7. Gods and other people will immediately take a liking
    to things you do or say. Wherever you go, you will
    always be greeted with respect and revered by happy
    crowd of dear friends.
 8. Ignorant people will grow wiser, unhealthy people
    will grow healthier, trouble people will feel happier,
    and woman can become man in their next life, if they
    wish to do so.
 9. You will escape from the three lower realms, and
    always be reborn in wholesome place, with a hand-
    some upright appearance and unusually fine charac-
    ter. You will enjoy supreme happiness and abundant
    wealth.
10. You will be able to plant innumerable roots of good-
    ness in the blessed minds of all living beings. You will
    help the living beings to reap bounteous, measureless
    merits and help them attain the final Buddhahood.
                              31


32

          SAVOR
Mindful Eating, Mindful Life
     Thich Nhat Hanh
            and
 Lilian Cheung D.Sc., R.D.


CONTENTS
FOREWORD
INTRODUCTION
PART 1
A Buddhist Perspective on Weight Control
CHAPTER 1 Ending Your Struggle with Weight
CHAPTER 2 Are You Really Appreciating the Apple?
               An Apple Meditation
CHAPTER 3 You Are More Than What You Eat
CHAPTER 4 Stop and Look: The Present Moment
PART 2
Mindful Action Plans
CHAPTER 5 Mindful Eating
CHAPTER 6 Mindful Moving
CHAPTER 7 Mindful Living Plan
PART 3
Individual and Collective Effort
CHAPTER 8 A Mindful World
NOTES
INDEX
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
APPENDIX A Integrating Mindfulness into Your Daily Life
APPENDIX B Discourse on the Four Kinds of Nutriments
APPENDIX C Total Relaxation


APPENDIX D Screen-Time Alternatives
APPENDIX E Community-Based Strategies to Prevent and Control
Obesity
APPENDIX F Resources
Copyright
About the Publisher




FOREWORD
Most books about nutrition and diet stress the calorie content of foods,
saturated fats, trans fats, carbohydrates, portion size, and the balance between
energy intake and energy expended. This book is di erent. This book is not
only about what to eat. This book also teaches how to eat.
   If you are someone who is concerned about your weight, perhaps you have
tried dieting in the past. Maybe you have gone from cutting calories, to
excluding fats, to avoiding “carbs,” to taking a chance on the grapefruit diet or
some other fad. Perhaps you have even lost weight—only to gain it right back
within a few months. You know something is wrong and you feel not in
control of your own body. You are convinced that something has to change,
but where do you begin?
   The answer, provided in this book, is not to begin with what you put on
your plate. Rather, you begin with what is already inside you, with your
awareness and experience of every moment you live—what the authors call
mindfulness. While the concept of mindfulness derives from Buddhist teaching,
anyone can become more mindful in nourishing our bodies. Many distractions
in daily life reinforce the mindless ingestion of food, and mindless eating is a
strong driver of weight gain and obesity. With awareness and practice, it is
possible to become more mindful in our eating—and in our lives. This book
tells you how to do it.
   Authored by an eminent spiritual leader and a renowned nutritionist, this
work infuses science into wisdom and wisdom into science. It is a practical
guide to eating mindfully and points the way to attain a healthier weight and a
more satisfying life.
                                                  Harvey V. Fineberg, M.D., Ph.D.
                                                                          President
                                                             Institute of Medicine
                                                          The National Academies
                                                                  Washington, D.C.




INTRODUCTION
IF YOU HAVE PICKED up Savor because you want more peace and happiness in
everyday life, then you are in the right place. If you have picked up Savor because
you or someone you love is struggling with weight and in need of practical
solutions, then this book is for you also.
   Learning to eat and live mindfully is the key to experiencing health and peace.
This vision brought us, a Zen Buddhist Master and a nutritionist, together to take a
fresh look at mindfulness and the problem of obesity that is spreading across the
globe. It is clear that standard approaches are not working to stem the tide of
weight gain and the burden it creates for people and communities. More than a
billion people worldwide are overweight—so many, in fact, that scientists call it an
obesity epidemic. And while this is certainly an apt description of the outcome of
eating too much and not moving enough, it does not fully describe what is going
on. It is also a worldwide crisis largely brought on by social trends that distract
and prevent us from doing the things that keep us in balance, healthy, and
connected with our inner selves and our place in the world. Savor is a guide to
help us all reconnect with these di erent aspects of our lives that together can
improve our weight, our well-being, and the well-being of our world.
   Common sense tells us that to lose weight, we must eat less and exercise more.
That is easier said than done, however. Many of us know that we need to eat less,
and we need to be more active. But somehow we get stuck. We start on a weight-
loss program with only good intentions, but when we cannot stay on track, we feel
disappointed and discouraged. We become pessimistic, more and more unhappy
with our weight. We spend hours worrying about our future, blaming ourselves for
what we’ve eaten or how inactive we’ve been in the past, and completely missing
the present moment—the moment in which we actually have the power to make
real change in our lives.
   To end our struggle, we must learn to not let regret, worry, or fear dominate our
life in the present moment. Each minute we spend worrying about the future and
regretting the past is a minute we miss in our appointment with life—a missed
opportunity to engage life and to see that each moment gives us the chance to
change for the better, to experience peace and joy. The practice of being fully


present in each moment is called mindfulness. It is an ancient Buddhist approach
to living that helps us to be in the here and now—and to end our struggle with
weight.
  To be mindful is to be completely aware of what is happening in the present, to
be fully aware of all that is going on within ourselves and all that is happening
around us, from moment to moment, without judgment or preconceived notions.
Although mindfulness has been taught in Eastern meditation trainings, it is not
some mystical or esoteric practice that is hard to learn. People in all walks of life
have followed this set of age-old practices on their path to health, well-being,
peace, and happiness for over twenty-five hundred years.
  When we walk and our mind is aware of each step that we plant rmly on the
ground, we are already practicing mindfulness. When we eat and our mind is aware
of each bite, savoring the taste and the nourishment it gives us, we are already
practicing mindfulness. To be mindful of something, we need to learn to be fully
present for an instant and look deeply into that something. We must rst stop our
wandering mind in order to begin to engage it in what is there in the present
moment. When we are mindful of what we are doing, we learn to keep our
appointment with life. This awareness of the present moment gives us the
opportunity and the tools to touch peace and joy, to see the true nature of who we
are and how we are related to everything else, and to end our struggle with weight.
  In Savor we share with you how to live mindfully, and in particular how living
mindfully can help you take care of your weight problem in a peaceful and
sustainable way. Throughout the book, we show you how to easily adopt the
practice of mindfulness and integrate it into eating, physical activity, and all other
facets of your daily life so that mindful-ness gradually becomes a core part of your
being.
  Dealing with our overweight—or with any of our life’s difficulties, for that matter
—is not a battle to be fought. Instead, we must learn how to make friends with our
hardships and challenges. They are there to help us; they are natural opportunities
for deeper understanding and transformation, bringing us more joy and peace as
we learn to work with them. With mindfulness practice, we gain insight into the
roots of our difficulties.
  You will learn to observe and be more aware of your motivations for and
obstacles to staying healthy. Why do you eat what you eat? How do you eat, and
how do you feel after you eat? What attitudes do you have toward physical


activity? What are the barriers—physical, psychological, cultural, and
environmental—that prevent you from eating well and staying active? As you
become more aware of your body and of the feelings, thoughts, and realities that
prevent you from taking health-enhancing actions, you will realize what you need
to do individually and what types of community and social support you need in
order to change your behavior. With these insights, you will be better equipped to
break through your barriers to a healthy lifestyle and weight control. You can start
to make changes step-by-step, establishing healthier habits and instilling more and
more peace within yourself.
   With the hectic pace of modern living, we recognize that it is very challenging
for people to add more tasks to their “to do” list. As you will see, mindfulness
practice does not need to be another “add-on.” Its beauty lies in the fact that it can
be fully and easily integrated into every act of our daily living, reminding us to live
the present moment fully.
   With mindfulness, we can choose how to live our lives now. We can seize any
moment and begin anew. It is as simple as taking a few in-breaths and out-breaths
here and there throughout the day—while answering e-mails, waiting in line, or
sitting in tra c. It is absolutely within anyone’s reach. Take small steps every day,
and be persistent. Small steps will add up over time. With the constant practice of
mindfulness, you will feel more alive and in the ow of life. You will nd more
stillness amid the chaos. You will have a better understanding of yourself and all
that is around you. The fog that veils your well-being will gradually dissipate,
allowing you to touch the joy and peace that have always been inside you. The
Buddha did not foresee many of the modern-day problems that we face, including
the obesity epidemic, but his teachings are timeless. They are foundations for
understanding and processes for gaining insight. As people have found over many
generations, solidity, freedom, calm, and joy are the fruits of mindful living.
   By combining the sage Buddhist philosophy with the science of nutrition, we can
contribute to a better understanding of our bodies and minds. We invite you to
embark on this mindfulness journey, just as others have over many generations, to
help you end your struggle with weight and improve your health, the health of
those around you, and the well-being of the world in which we live.


About This Book
The rst part of Savor (chapters 1 through 4) provides a Buddhist perspective on
weight control and well-being. We begin the book by o ering you a new way of
looking at your weight problem—through the lens of the Four Noble Truths, the
most fundamental Buddhist teaching. You rst need to acknowledge that you have
a weight problem and re ect on whether or not you are ready to make changes and
are committed to making them. If you are, you need to know what has led to your
being overweight. Through a series of questions for self-inquiry, you will gain a
better understanding of the reasons that you are overweight. You will realize that
you do have the power to stop the unhealthy, mindless routines that led you to
become overweight, if you so choose. And you will realize that mindfulness
practice is an e ective path toward a healthier way of living and a healthier
weight.
   Next, we o er you a taste of mindfulness—a meditation on eating an apple. With
mindfulness, the simple act of eating an apple becomes a profound experience. It
opens up our awareness that the apple is a manifestation of our world and that it
cannot come into being in isolation. The apple is dependent on everything else for
its existence, reminding us that we, too, are constantly supported by the e ort of
many beings so that we can enjoy the apple.
   We then invite you to look at your personal makeup. We explore how everything
you see, taste, smell, hear, touch, and think a ects your weight and all other
aspects of your daily life. Diet books typically focus only on how foods
immediately bene t the body and rarely address the psychosocial, cultural, and
environmental factors that a ect our habits of eating and physical activity. It is
clear that we are not only what we eat; we are what we consume through all our
senses. What we eat and how we eat are in uenced by our ancestors, parents, and
culture, the food businesses, the media, and societal forces. To maintain a healthy
weight and lifestyle, we must look carefully at the interrelationships of our body,
our mind, and society at large.
   As you begin to understand your di culty with weight, an important step is to
learn to empower yourself to transform this di culty. The Buddha’s Discourse on
the Four Foundations of Mindfulness elaborates on exercises that can lead to
transformation and healing. We take you through the salient points of the four
foundations of mindfulness practice for e ective transformation, showing how to


instill joy and peace in yourself as well as overcome your destructive habits. We
describe a process and practice that will enhance your awareness of your body,
feelings, mind, and all perceptions, and how they are intimately related to changing
your eating and physical activity habits. You will learn basic breathing techniques
to calm your body, feelings, and mind, and you will learn how to see yourself in
relation to everything that is around you. With continuous practice, you will build
up the con dence to recognize the nature and cause of your su ering and then
transform it at its base, to uproot long-held negative beliefs, habits, and feelings.
   The second part of Savor (chapters 5 through 7) brings mindfulness practice to
your daily life. All of us eat and drink numerous times a day. These are wonderful
opportunities for us to practice mindfulness. Paying attention to what we eat and
drink as well as to how we eat and drink brings us nourishment, sustaining not
only our own body and mind but also the well-being of our world for future
generations. We provide you with a scienti c primer on healthy eating and
drinking, to help you decide what to eat and drink, and to o er concrete ways for
you to eat and drink more mindfully. Through a series of questions, you begin to
establish your own mindful-eating goals and personalized mindful-eating plan so
that you can savor your foods and drinks while maintaining health and well-being.
   We move our bodies every day, though our twenty- rst-century lifestyle has
rendered us much more sedentary. Moving mindfully not only helps us burn more
calories and maintain our health but also is a valuable opportunity to practice
mindfulness in action. In chapter 6, we o er mindful ways to help you maintain
the level of physical activity that you need to improve your weight and health.
Included are reflections to help you create your personalized mindful-moving plan.
   Mindful eating and moving are both held in a larger net of general everyday,
moment-to-moment mindfulness. To enhance your rhythm of mindful living, we
propose simple tools to increase your practice of mindfulness throughout your
waking hours. By creating a strategic mindfulness living plan, you can turn even the
most mundane chore into an opportunity to practice mindfulness and nourish
yourself.
   As you steadily progress in your journey toward a healthy weight, you will
realize that your ability to make wholesome choices and follow a healthier lifestyle
depends not only on you, but also on all that is around you. We are all connected
and interdependent. What one does will a ect everything and everyone else, and
what everything and everyone else does will have an e ect on each individual.


Mindful living and weight control are not just an individual matter. We must also
take collective action to make our environment less toxic and more supportive of
healthy eating and active living. In the third part of the book (chapter 8), we
explore ways we can help improve the environment and the community—for
ourselves, our family, our friends, and future generations. By cultivating
mindfulness energy, we will gain insight and understanding leading to greater
compassion for all beings. It is this compassion that motivates us to take individual
and collective action, creating profound change in our communities and societies
to improve our well-being and the well-being of our world.
  We have a nite amount of energy to spend every day before becoming
exhausted. Mindfulness helps you use your energy wisely, spending it on situations,
people, and causes that bring you the most joy, meaning, and peace. Mindfulness is
the guiding light that already exists inside every one of us. Discover it. We beckon
you to use it and let it illuminate your life in every moment. Living like this, you
will nd yourself savoring your life deeply. Not only will this help you achieve the
healthy weight and well-being that you seek; it will bring to the surface life’s rich
abundance that is so often invisible to us.




PART 1
A Buddhist Perspective on Weight Control




CHAPTER 1
Ending Your Struggle with Weight
              I have been struggling with my weight all my life. I know I have
              to lose weight. I do not like the way I look. I do not like the
              way I feel. I have gone on diets, tried diligently to exercise, lost
              the weight, and had it all come back in no time. I’ve lost count
              of how many times I have gone through this yo-yo cycle of loss
              and gain. I am totally frustrated, ashamed of myself, anxious
              and overwhelmed about my weight. I am tired of carrying this
              extra weight around. I do not feel good. Every day is a struggle
              for me. Every night is a nightmare. I have diabetes now, and I
              am really worried. I fear that I will not be around to see my
              children grow up. I am here because I do not want to give up.
              There must be a way out of this suffering.
                                         —Participant in a mindfulness retreat
THIS WOMAN IS NOT alone. Everywhere you turn—from television, magazines, and
Web sites to newspapers and radio—you see, read, or hear stories about the U.S.
population’s frustrating struggle to lose weight. Two out of three adults in the
United States are overweight, and one out of three is obese,1 more than double the
rate of obesity in the late 1970s. In scienti c terms, we are in the middle of an
obesity pandemic, a state of extreme weight gain that is overtaking not only the
United States but also much of the globe. This steep rise in obesity over the past
thirty years has no parallel in our history, and if we do not change our current
trends, the numbers will continue to rise.
   And this is largely because our society has become toxic in a way that experts
call “obesigenic.” We are surrounded by societal forces that drive us to eat more
and move less. And the natural result is weight gain, obesity, and the myriad health
and emotional problems that go along with them. Yes, it’s ultimately a personal
decision to eat more than one needs and to not exercise enough, but it’s also
nearly impossible to escape the pressures around us that lead to unhealthy
behaviors. Bombarded day in and day out by unhealthy outside in uences, we


easily become dissociated from what our bodies truly need and truly want.
   Just think of the food court at the local shopping mall. It’s a feast of choices that
can overwhelm the senses. You see and smell foods that are savory as well as those
that are sweet—steak sizzling in teriyaki sauce, oven-fresh pizza, hot cinnamon
buns drizzled with snow-white icing, rich co ee confections infused with sugar
syrup and topped with cream. The abundance of aromas, colors, and sounds
awaken your palate and your urge to eat. In and of itself this isn’t necessarily a bad
thing—who doesn’t love the look and smell of delicious food?—but it often spurs
us to eat automatically whether we’re actually hungry or not. Before we know it,
we’ve eaten a supersized meal that has two-thirds of the calories we need in one
day—and we weren’t even hungry to begin with. When this happens day after day,
week after week, what began as one enjoyable moment of eating becomes a weight
problem that can a ect us the rest of our lives. And this is just one of many
examples of the impact our surroundings and social networks can have on our
weight and health.
   In our food supply, there are plenty of foods and drinks that are highly seasoned
with salt, sugar, and fat. According to Dr. David Kessler, former commissioner of
the U.S. Food and Drug Administration, the food and restaurant industries
deliberately produce high-salt, high-sugar, and high-fat foods just so that people
cannot resist them and want more. In his book The End of Overeating: Taking
Control of the Insatiable American Appetite, citing research done in behavioral
neuroscience, nutrition, and psychology, he reports that foods high in fat, salt, and
sugar alter the brain’s chemistry, stimulating the release of dopamine, which in
turn is associated with the feeling of pleasure.2 This is one of the reasons that we
crave more of foods and drinks high in fat, sugar, and salt—because they are
satisfying.
   Advertising is another. It’s the market economy’s way to shape social norms that
propel consumption and profits. And when it comes to the food industry, what they
want is for consumers to truly consume—to eat as much food and to drink as many
drinks as they can stomach, and then have some more. It is telling that in the
United States, the food industry spends more on advertising than any other industry
except the auto industry.3 Every day we’re exposed to dozens of ads for food and
beverages, each one cueing us to eat and drink. And there is no place that is o -
limits for eating and drinking: we eat and drink in our cars and at our desks, as we
sit in meetings and as we stroll through the shopping malls. It is no wonder that we


often nd ourselves eating and drinking beyond what we need to satisfy our true
physiological hunger. We have created a culture of constant snacking, drinking, and
eating.
   Now, think of our social norms around physical activity. From the Industrial
Revolution in the early 1800s up to our current information technology revolution,
we have become increasingly sedentary as we rely more and more on machines,
gadgets, and automobiles to do our work and get around. We have drastically
diminished the amount of energy we burn every day through bodily movements
and the use of our muscles. And with the average home in the United States having
more television sets than people,4 we have become couch potatoes living under the
spell of the television.
   Together, all these societal forces push us toward eating more calories each day
than we expend, and without our being aware of it. Over time these extra calories
build up, and before we even realize it we’ve put on a good deal of weight. And it
doesn’t take too much for this to happen. Over the course of one year, one hundred
extra calories each day—the equivalent of eating one small cookie or of driving a
mile instead of walking it—could end up packing ten pounds of extra fat on our
bodies.
   Given the huge burden these social in uences place on us, how can we get back
in touch with our bodies and relieve ourselves of the burden and su ering that
arise from being overweight? How can each of us reach a healthier weight?
   The answer almost certainly doesn’t rest with the current weight-loss industry in
the United States. Weight-loss programs, diet books, and diet foods, herbs, and pills
represent an estimated $59-billion industry in the United States.5 Thousands of fad-
diet books and weight-loss plans come and go. Yet these nearly always fail people
over time. You can lose weight on any diet, but there is no scienti c evidence that
rigid dieting will help you achieve weight loss in the long run. On the contrary, the
U.S. population is growing fatter and fatter, and growing increasingly frustrated and
discouraged by its failure to lose weight.
   Millions are spent on research and development by pharmaceutical companies to
  nd an obesity x. But there is still no magic pill or formula that can help us lose
weight and maintain our lost weight without side e ects. The U.S. Food and Drug
Administration is cautious in the approval of these fat- ghting drugs. Yet those few
drugs on the market that can help people shed a few pounds have unwanted side
effects.6


   The di cult truth is that the basic law of thermodynamics still holds: When we
eat more calories than we expend, we gain weight. When we burn more energy
through physical activity or exercise than we take in from food and drinks, we lose
weight. Though this sounds basic and simple, the fact that so many of us are
overweight points to the complexity of the situation. For anyone who has tried
many times to lose weight, the thought of trying again may feel like an
overwhelming and daunting task. Is it truly possible to change one’s habits of
eating and moving, especially in the face of a society that pushes us so hard in the
wrong direction? How can one begin to make these changes?
   The Buddha teaches that change requires insight, and insight cannot begin until
we stop and focus our attention on what is happening right in front of us. This
stopping, or shamatha, allows us to rest the body and the mind. When we have
calmed ourselves, we can then go on to look deeply into our current situation. We
need to step o our frantic life treadmills, to stop unconsciously doing the same
things over and over again that have allowed our weight to creep up. We need to
stop, rest, and re ect on a constructive way forward that will end the habits that
have led to our current weight issues. We need to be fully aware of what is going
on in our daily living. Only then can we begin to change.
Changing Your Habit Energy
There is a Zen story about a man and a horse.7 The horse is galloping quickly, and
it appears that the rider is urgently heading somewhere important. A bystander
along the road calls out, “Where are you going?” and the rider replies, “I don’t
know! Ask the horse!”
   This is also our life story. Many of us are riding a horse, but we don’t know
where we are going, and we can’t stop. The horse is our “habit energy,” the
relentless force of habit that pulls us along, that we are often unaware of and feel
powerless to change. We are always running. It has become a habit, the norm of
our everyday living. We run all the time, even during our sleep—the time that we
are supposed to rest and regenerate our bodies. We are our worst enemies, in
conflict with ourselves, and therefore we can easily start conflict with others.
   When a strong emotion arises within us like a storm, we are in great turmoil. We
have no peace. Many of us try to pacify the storm by watching television or eating
comfort foods. But the storm does not calm down after hours of watching. The


storm does not go away after a bag of chips or a bowl of ice cream. We hate
ourselves afterward for eating the chips and the ice cream. We dread stepping on
the scale the next day. We vow to never do it again. But time after time, we do.
Why? Because our habit energy pushes us.
  How can we stop this state of turmoil? How can we stop our fear, our despair,
our anger, and our cravings? We have to learn to become solid and stable like an
oak tree, and not be blown from side to side by the emotional storm. We have to
learn the art of stopping—stopping our running so that we can be present for and
embrace our habit energies of worry, blame, guilt, and fear, and calm the strong
emotions that dictate us. We have to learn to live fully in the present moment. We
need to practice breathing in and breathing out with all our awareness. We have to
learn to become mindful.
  When we are mindful, touching deeply the present moment, in the here and now,
we gain more understanding, more acceptance, more forgiveness and love of self
and others; our aspiration to relieve su ering grows; and we have more chances to
touch joy and peace.
  We need the energy of mindfulness to recognize and be present with our habit
energy so that we may prevent it from dominating us and stop its often destructive
course. Mindfulness allows us to acknowledge our habit energy every time it pops
up: “Hello, my habit energy. I know you are there.” If you just mindfully smile to
your habit energy, it will lose much of its strength. The chips stay in the cupboard,
the ice cream in the freezer. The storm passes by, and we watch, breathing in and
breathing out all the while.
  After we become calmer, we can recognize our weight problem more clearly and
acknowledge it instead of denying it. This may not be easy for you to do. You may
feel angry, frustrated, or fed up about your weight. Do not suppress these feelings
of anger. Instead, as the Buddha has taught us, accept and embrace these di cult
feelings, like a mother cradling her crying baby. The crying baby needs the
mother’s loving care. In a similar manner, your negative emotions and turmoil are
crying out loud, trying to get your attention. Your negative emotions also need
your tender, loving care. By embracing your negative feelings whenever they arise,
you can prevent yourself from being swept away by your emotional storm, and you
can calm yourself. When you are calmer, you are more able to see that you already
have within yourself the power and the tools to begin to change.
  Stopping, calming, and resting are preconditions for healing. If we cannot stop,


we will continue on the course of destruction caused by unmindful consumption.
The Four Noble Truths of Healthy Weight
The Buddha o ered many teachings to help people end their su ering, the rst and
most important being the Four Noble Truths. The First Noble Truth is that all of us
have su ering in our lives. None of us can escape from it. The Second Noble Truth
is that we can identify the causes of our suffering. The Third Noble Truth is that we
can put an end to our su ering and that healing is possible. Finally, the Fourth
Noble Truth is that there are paths to free us from su ering. We can cultivate our
well-being by concretely applying mindfulness to our daily living.
   A simple example from the eld of medicine can help illustrate the Four Noble
Truths. Let’s say you are diagnosed with type 2 diabetes (First Noble Truth), which
was likely brought on by eating a poor diet and becoming very overweight (Second
Noble Truth). Your doctor tells you the situation does not need to be like that and
can be controlled (con rming the Third Noble Truth). You follow the doctor’s
prescription—taking your medicine, eating better, and exercising more—which is
your route to healing (Fourth Noble Truth). These teachings of the Buddha
originate from a time when su ering was more likely to be caused by a lack of
food rather than too much, or by a body overburdened with physical labor rather
than one grown ill from lack of use. Yet they apply to all forms of su ering,
including those related to being overweight.
   Now, let’s re ect upon the Four Noble Truths and how they relate to achieving
your healthy weight. The self-exploration that begins here and continues
throughout this book will help you navigate through all the important factors in
your life that a ect your weight. It will help you discover what science-based paths
you can follow to reach a healthier weight. And through your own awareness, you
can discover and decide for yourself what is bene cial and what is not bene cial
for your body and well-being.
   Through the process, you will realize whether your weight has a ected you
physically and emotionally. You can become more in touch with the way you have
been eating and drinking, the amount of exercise you have been doing or not
doing. You can recognize the amount and type of e ort you have been spending to
control your weight. You can appreciate how your work is a ecting your daily
lifestyle and your weight. Through all these re ections, you can gain insights from
your past that can lead you to success on your path of healing.


   As you read the rest of this chapter and this book, read with an open mind and
an open heart. Do not struggle with the concepts—the information here is not
intended to simply add to your warehouse of knowledge. Be like the earth. When
the rain comes, the earth simply opens up to the rain and soaks it all in. Allow the
wisdom in this book to nurture the seeds that lie deep in the soil of your
consciousness so that they can sprout and mature into the transformative energies
of mindfulness and insight. A teacher cannot give you the truth. The truth is
already in you. A teacher can only offer you the chance to awaken your true self.
               Enlightenment, peace, and joy will not be granted by someone
               else.
               The well is within us,
                  And if we dig deeply in the present moment,
               The water will spring forth8
The First Noble Truth: Being Overweight or Obese Is Suffering
When we are overweight, every part of the body may feel the burden. Our knees
may ache, carrying too much weight, becoming swollen and sti with arthritis.9
Our heart may labor harder, our blood pressure may rise, and harmful plaque may
build up inside the lining of the arteries, heightening the risk of heart attack and
stroke. Our breathing itself may become a problem around the clock as the risk of
asthma, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, and sleep apnea increases.10
   Many of these increased health risks exist in people who are merely overweight,
not just among those who are obese. Diabetes, an insidious disease with disabling
and deadly complications, is two to four times more likely to strike someone who
is overweight than someone who is at a healthy weight, and it is ve to twelve
times more likely to strike someone who is obese.11 The risk of cancer in several
parts of the body—breast, colon, esophagus, kidney, pancreas, and uterus—is
higher in people who carry excess body fat than in people who do not.12 So is the
risk of having gallstones that require the gallbladder to be removed.13 The risk of
infertility,14 cataracts,15 and perhaps even dementia may be higher in people who
are obese than in those who are at a healthy weight.16 Given the toll that excess
weight takes on all areas of the body, it is no surprise that being overweight or
obese in midlife increases the chances of dying early.17 Even people who are not


overweight but have gained more than twenty pounds since the start of college
have an increased risk of dying early.18
    Those who are overweight and obese su er in countless other ways as well, due
to the pervasive stigma associated with weight.19 As children they may, owing to
their weight, become the target of teasing and bullying from their peers. As adults,
they may be less likely to win a job or a promotion, or they may be stereotyped as
lazy or less disciplined. Even in the doctor’s o ce, they may face prejudice
because of their weight.
    What type of su ering have you endured because of your weight? Physical pain?
Emotional pain? A feeling of shame, insecurity, regret, anger? Identifying and
acknowledging the nature and depth of your su ering may be di cult. You may
want to suppress it and not deal with it. However, our rst step toward healing and
transformation is to recognize the existence of our suffering and not run away from
it.
The Second Noble Truth: You Can Identify the Roots of Your Weight Problem
Before you can change your weight, you must have a better understanding of the
reasons that you are overweight. Fundamentally, weight gain or loss results from
changing the balance of energy coming in (the calories we eat and drink) and
going out (the calories we burn o through our everyday activities). Yet science
has found that many factors can lead us to get out of balance and gain weight—our
ancestry, our lifestyle choices, and our surroundings.
    Take the time to re ect on the numerous factors that we describe here. Look
deeply to see whether they apply to you so that you may understand the true
nature of your problem with weight. Looking deeply requires courage. The causes
are knowable, and with diligent e ort you can get to the bottom of them. With
greater insight into the reasons that you are overweight, you can begin to
determine what course of action you can take to achieve a healthier weight.
    Know that the attachment to pleasurable desires can cause us to su er. As we
crave insatiably for delightful and pleasurable experience through our
consumption of foods and drinks and our sedentary way of life, we are well on our
way to gaining weight. Do these desires really satisfy you in the long run and bring
you happiness? Not likely, since all these are temporary xes that get us to gain
more weight. When you succumb to these cravings, you are perpetuating the cycle
of frustration, anxiety, and suffering.


  Buddhism describes creatures known as pretas, or Hungry Ghosts, who have
insatiable appetites for food, drinks, and other cravings. They are desperate beings
who are always hungry, with tiny mouths; long, narrow necks; and distended
bellies. Though they are constantly ravenous, driven by the desire to eat, their tiny
mouths and necks prevent them from swallowing the food they ingest. The act of
eating does not help them overcome negative emotions and cravings. Eating more
only causes them to have more pain and agony. Are you consuming like a Hungry
Ghost?
  As you begin to look deeply into the roots of your weight problem, take care not
to be harsh on yourself. The “judge” inside your head often makes you feel bad
about all the “shoulds”—you should not have eaten that cheesecake, you should
have spent more time at the gym. You may also be daunted by your past failures
and struggles with weight. It is time to stop blaming yourself for these failures.
Perhaps you were following the wrong advice. Perhaps you were able to lose some
weight initially on one diet or another, but the diets were too restrictive, your
cravings took hold, and you eventually gave up and gained the weight back. You
are not separate from your family and environment. In the past you did not have
enough of the right conditions supporting you to maintain a healthy weight.
  Do you understand why you did not succeed? What were your obstacles? Do not
get lost in regret about your past mistakes. The past is the past. It is not the
present. You can seize the present moment—any present moment—to begin anew.
Just as you embrace your negative feelings, embrace your weight problem like a
mother cradling her crying baby, so that you can transform your fear, despair,
anger, frustration, and self-criticism. Mindfulness practice can help you become
calmer, so that you can look at your situation in a more detached way, without
self-condemnation. This frees you to focus on the solutions rather than dwell on
the past or your problems. The Buddha said that if we know how to look deeply
into our su ering and recognize what feeds it, we are already on the path of
emancipation.
Do Your Parents Have Weight Problems?
What you have inherited from your ancestors’ gene pool can a ect your weight.
Studies have shown that when one of a child’s parents is overweight, the child is
more than twice as likely to become an overweight adult, regardless of whether the
child herself is at a normal weight.20 Having two overweight parents further


increases the chance that the child will become overweight.21 Nevertheless,
parental in uences on our weight could be due to nature, nurture, or a
combination of both. When we were young, parents also controlled what and how
much we ate as well as how active we were. If your mother breast-fed you, it may
have lowered your risk of becoming overweight.22 If your father encouraged you to
“clean up your plate” as a habit, you may nd it really hard to stop eating today’s
supersize portions even though you are full. Did your parents spend their free time
playing with you in the yard, or did you spend much of your family time slouched
together in front of the television set? As you consider the role of parental
in uences on your weight, keep in mind that your genetics are not your destiny—
and genetics alone cannot explain the rapid rise in obesity we have seen over the
past thirty years. Even if your parents were overweight, you can still achieve a
healthy weight by following a healthy lifestyle. It just means that you may have to
pay more attention to what you eat and how much you move than someone who
does not have a genetic tendency to be overweight.
Do You Drink Too Much Sugary Soda?
Drinking sugar-sweetened beverages can contribute to weight gain. A study in teens
found that for every additional can of soda they drank a day, their chances of
becoming obese increased by 60 percent.23 The Nurses’ Health Study found that
women who increased their consumption of sugary drinks from one or fewer drinks
per week to one or more drinks per day gained more weight over a four-year
period than women who cut back on sugary drinks.24
  Scientists believe there are several reasons that drinking sugary drinks
contributes to weight gain. The calories from soda are often “invisible.” When you
drink your calories rather than eat them, you may not cut back on other foods to
compensate for the liquid calories. With a twelve-ounce can of sugary soda
containing nearly ten teaspoons, or about 150 calories, of sugar, it’s easy to stack
up extra calories during the day, especially if you’re drinking sugary soda to
quench your thirst. Soft drinks may also increase your sense of hunger or decrease
your sense of satiety or fullness.25
  As you consider the role of sweetened drinks on your weight, notice whether you
feel hungrier after you drink a sugary soda. If you have already cut back on sugary
drinks and substituted diet ones, notice whether drinking the intensely sweet sugar
substitutes has conditioned your palate to expect, crave, and seek supersweet foods.


Do You Get Less Than a Half Hour of Exercise or Physical Activity Each Day?
For weight control, the “energy out” side of the energy-balance equation is just as
important as the “energy in.” There’s strong evidence that getting enough physical
activity can help prevent weight gain and, when combined with a lower-calorie
eating plan, can help promote weight loss. What is enough? It depends on how t
you are. For some people, taking a brisk half-hour walk ve days a week would be
enough. For others, taking a high-intensity spinning class for seventy- ve minutes a
week would be enough. For people who are very inactive, just getting moving is a
start. We discuss physical activity for weight control and for general good health in
chapter 6, “Mindful Moving.” For now, re ect on whether you get enough physical
activity. If not, why not?
Do You Watch More Than One Hour of Television a Day?
Many studies in adults and children have shown that watching too much television
increases one’s risk of becoming overweight. The Nurses’ Health Study, for
example, found that for every additional two hours of television that women
watched per day, their risk of becoming obese increased by 23 percent. Even
getting a lot of physical activity did not fully protect these women from the e ects
of TV watching on weight: among the most active women, those who watched more
than twenty hours of television per week had a higher risk of becoming obese than
those who watched less than six hours of television per week.26
   Researchers believe there are several possible ways that watching too much
television could lead to weight gain. Sitting around and watching television may
take the place of more physically demanding activities, so the “energy out” side of
the energy balance equation goes down. TV watching may also a ect the “energy
in” side of the equation: people tend to eat while they watch television and also
tend to eat what they watch on television—fast food, sugary drinks, and other high-
calorie snacks. This adds up to extra calories in, fewer calories out, and, ultimately,
to weight gain. As you re ect on your TV-watching habits, think about why you
spend as much time as you do watching television. Do you watch a lot of television
to avoid boredom? To avoid communicating with your family members? Or to cope
with stress? What other activities might you do instead? (See a list of suggestions
in appendix D for ideas.)


Do You Get Enough Sleep?
A good night’s sleep is essential for good health. New research suggests that a good
night’s sleep may also be essential to controlling your weight.27 The Nurses’ Health
Study, for example, followed seventy thousand women for sixteen years. Women
who skimped on sleep—getting ve hours or less each night—were 15 percent
more likely to become obese than women who got seven hours of sleep per
night.28 Scientists are still teasing out why lack of sleep may lead people to pack
on the pounds. People who don’t get enough sleep may be more fatigued than
people who get a healthy night’s sleep,29 decreasing the “energy out” side of the
energy-balance equation. Or staying awake for a longer period of time may simply
give people more opportunities to eat, increasing the “energy in” side of the
energy-balance equation.30 Sleep deprivation may shift the balance of key
hormones that control appetite, making sleep-deprived people hungrier than
people who get enough sleep.31 One small study found that sleep-deprived
volunteers reported more hunger, especially for high-carbohydrate and high-calorie
comfort foods.32 If you are not getting enough sleep, think about why. Are you
lying awake at night lled with anxiety? Do you stay up too late watching
television? Do you notice that you are hungrier on days when you have not gotten
as good a night’s sleep?
Do You Eat Mindlessly?
Nowadays, with all the societal pressures and the “high speed” living of our
Internet age, much of our eating happens on autopilot. We do not pay attention to
how much food is served or how much we have eaten, how tasty the food is or
whether we’re even hungry at all. Instead, how much we eat is often driven by
external cues—the size of the bowl, the size of the plate, the portion size of the
food itself. Given the supersizing trends over the past twenty years, it is easy to fall
victim to “portion distortion” and to lose sight of how much food is an appropriate
amount to eat.33 Recently, researchers have conducted scienti c studies looking at
how mindless eating a ects our food consumption. What they found is that
mindless eating can easily lead to overeating. In a classic experiment, people at a
movie theater were served fresh or stale popcorn in di erent-size containers.
Moviegoers who were given stale popcorn said the taste was “unfavorable.” Yet
when they were served stale popcorn in a large container, they ate 61 percent more
popcorn than they did when it was served in a small container while they were


watching the movie—and they underestimated the amount of popcorn they ate.34 In
another experiment, graduate students at a Super Bowl party who served themselves
from large bowls ate 56 percent more snack food than students who served
themselves from smaller bowls.35 The larger the portion size, the less able we are
to estimate how many calories we are eating.36
   The cues for mindless eating reach beyond the size of a plate or the size of a
portion. Our whole surroundings support mindless eating, from the ads on TV to
fast-food “dollar menus” to favorable placement of unhealthy foods on supermarket
shelves. All these cues combined can make it very, very di cult to nd what it is
our bodies truly need. Are you often eating on the run, in the car, or at your desk?
Do you have to dine out often because you have not had time to cook? And do you
find yourself making unwise food choices when eating out?
   Practicing mindfulness can help us avoid the external cues that trap us, avoid
mindless eating, and focus in on the practices that keep us healthy.
   Mindlessness is the opposite of mindfulness. Eating is not the only activity that
we do mindlessly, and we are driven to mindlessness by more than just the size of
a bowl or plate. We drink a cup of tea and focus more on the worries and anxieties
of the day than on living the moment of enjoying the tea. We sit with someone we
love, and rather than focus on the person and this moment we have with them,
we’re distracted by other thoughts. We walk but are more focused on reviewing the
talking points for our next appointment than on the serene moment we’re having as
we walk. We are usually someplace else, thinking about the past or the future
rather than the now. The horse of our habit energy is carrying us along, and we are
its captive. We need to stop our horse and reclaim our freedom. We need to shine
the light of mindfulness on everything we eat and do, so the darkness of
forgetfulness will disappear.
Do You Live or Work in an Environment That Makes It Difficult to Eat Healthfully
and Keep Moving?
Where you live and where you work can have important implications for whether
you can eat well and stay active. If healthy choices are not available in your
workplace or neighborhood, it makes it very di cult for you to eat well, no matter
how knowledgeable or determined you are. If your neighborhood is not safe
enough for you to walk, jog, or ride a bike in, it will deter you from staying active.
Pay attention to your surrounding environment, and take note of the various


barriers to active living and healthy eating. What prevents you from following your
good intentions? Are your sincere e orts being sabotaged by family or friends?
Does your job or what you do on a daily basis prevent you from staying on course
with healthy eating and active living? Do you have too much work-related stress?
Do you have time for yourself?
   As you start to clear your mind of distractions, these barriers will become
clearer to you, and you will start to work on ways around them as well as ways to
work with people in your community to make a healthier environment for
everyone.
Other Factors Feeding Your Weight Problem
Scienti c and public health experts are working hard to gure out what can be
done to turn the obesity epidemic around. Yet, science still does not have all the
answers about what leads people to gain too much weight. So it is important to
consider other factors that may have caused your weight problem. It may be
helpful for you to re ect on the following questions about your own attitudes,
thoughts, feelings, and actions that may have led you to eat more and move less. Be
honest with yourself. Write your re ections in a journal so that you can review
them later and gain a better understanding of yourself. Once you are conscious of
these attitudes, thoughts, feelings, and actions, you can work, step-by-step, to
change them—to break the mindless forces of habit that have led you to eat more
and move less.
   How do you feel about your current weight? Is having a healthy weight a high
priority in your life that’s worth your time and energy to address? Do you have
enough concentration to focus on your weight problem, your poor eating habits,
and your sedentary lifestyle? What is distracting you from your focus?
   Do you feel that you are doomed to be overweight and it does not matter how
hard you try? Do you eat just to feel better, if only for short time?
   Are you eating before going to bed because you are tired? Are you attached to
certain unhealthy foods late at night? Why? What triggers you to eat again just a
little while after finishing your dinner?
   Are you using food to ll an emotional void, relieve loneliness, or cope with
your anxiety, fears, or stress? Do you continue to eat when you are full, and how
does this make you feel? Is overeating a Band-Aid to cover up another type of
pain? Are you trying to feed an emotional hunger? Are you using food as a crutch?


Do you use food to ward o the painful, heart-wrenching feelings that you have
buried deep in your heart? Re ect mindfully about how you may use food to cope
with your negative emotions; you will see that edible food is not the right
nourishment for them.
  Where do you get your information? From a credible source? Or from
magazines, TV shows, or advertisements that sensationalize results and make
promises they can’t ful ll? Do you nd yourself being a ected by food
commercials on television or in magazine advertising? Have you been the victim of
countless diet books that have led you to lose con dence in your ability to reach a
healthy weight?
  Do you have a preexisting health condition that prevents you from exercising? If
you do, did you seek out the advice of a professional to help you nd appropriate
physical activities that you can do on a daily basis?
  Listen to your heart. What are your inner longings? How are you going to ful ll
these longings? Do your self-talk, beliefs, or interactions with others hinder you
from maintaining healthy eating and active living? Are you your own worst enemy?
Have you put time and effort into healthy eating and active living? If not, why not?
THESE ARE ALL VERY complex questions that take time, effort, and sometimes a bit
of painful soul-searching to answer, but they are very important issues to address.
And tackling them head-on and resolving them is just as important to reclaiming
our healthy weight as the better-studied issues, like getting more exercise and
cutting back on sugary soda.
  As you learn to be more mindful, to better focus on what is happening in the
present moment, the barriers and motivations that drive you toward unhealthy
habits will become clearer, as will the path away from them toward better health.
The Third Noble Truth: Reaching a Healthy Weight Is Possible
You can put an end to your weight problem. You have already taken the rst step:
by spending energy to understand the roots of the problem, you have stopped
running away from it. When you direct your attention to your excess weight and
the su ering associated with it, you can see the potential for wellness. You also
understand that it is possible to reach your goal of a healthy weight when you take
the right actions. Remember, there was a time before you became overweight when
your weight was normal. It is easy to forget that.


   Ask yourself where you are in this healthy-weight journey. Focus on whether or
not you aspire to be a di erent person, to feel better about yourself, to be able to
function better, to be happier. Ask yourself what this extra weight means to you,
and ask yourself whether you are truly ready to let it go.
   To be successful, it is very important for you to believe that you can achieve a
healthy weight. Believing in yourself, having the faith that you can change the
habits that do not serve you well, and adopting science-based wisdom are
important for successful transformation of our behavior. According to psychologist
Albert Bandura, “perceived self-e cacy” is essential for any behavior change. 37
Self-e cacy is simply the belief that one can carry out a behavior necessary to
produce a desired outcome. What we believe can signi cantly a ect what we can
achieve. People who believe that they can reach a healthier weight through healthy
eating and active living set relevant goals that they perceive to be important for the
desired change. They believe that those goals are attainable, and they believe that
they have the ability to carry them out.
   What are your current beliefs? Are they real, or are they shadowed with illusions
from your past experiences, failures, and disappointments? The past is the past. The
past is your teacher and can o er valuable lessons on what worked and what did
not work for you. But it is not your present reality. It remains your present reality
only if you allow it to be. Do not let your past experiences hold you back. Your
failures do not need to determine your current or future experience. Focus on the
present. When you focus on the present, you do not give any power to your past
actions.
   Recognize that losing weight is possible and that you can do it. It will not be as
easy as popping a pill and watching the pounds melt away, but it will be a journey
—sometimes hard—that will be well worth taking.
   Learn to listen to your body with compassion. You are more capable of helping
yourself if you treat yourself with compassion and a loving heart. Your guilt and
hopelessness will diminish, and you will be more accepting of yourself. Don’t judge
yourself harshly. Love yourself, and affirm that you can reach a healthy weight. You
are losing the weight for yourself, not to please anyone else.
   As you start to recognize your innate capacity to be more mindful, you will
become calmer, and it will be easier to nd solutions to the problems you face.
Allow yourself to truly feel what your life would be like if you could maintain a
healthier weight. A rm to yourself that reaching a healthier weight is possible


when you pay attention to and take care of your weight. When you take care of an
orchid plant, the plant needs your focused attention, to be watered and nurtured
on a regular basis. Without such care, the owers will wither and die prematurely
and you cannot enjoy their beauty. You are just like the orchid plant. You need
tender loving care for your ideal to be realized. When we look at all beings,
including ourselves, with eyes of love and compassion, we can take care of
ourselves better. With mindfulness, we can nurture ourselves with greater ease and
interest, and our effort will come more naturally.
   Even if you have been burdened and tormented by your weight throughout the
years, there are seeds of well-being inside you. But you may have lost sight of this
because the discomfort of your overweight is overpowering. When you have a
toothache, you call your dentist and ask for an emergency appointment to relieve
your pain. You know deeply at that point that not having a toothache is happiness.
Yet later, when you don’t have a toothache, you forget and do not treasure your
non-toothache. Practicing mindfulness helps us appreciate the well-being that is
already there and realize that further well-being is possible if we take the right
actions.
   We need to water the seeds of joy in ourselves in order to realize well-being,
including the well-being that comes from being at a healthier weight. Please ask
yourself, “What nourishes joy in me? What nourishes joy in others? Do I nourish
the joy in myself and the joy in others enough? Do I appreciate the many reasons
for joy that are already in my life? Or have I been living in forgetfulness, taking
many things for granted?” If you have good eyesight, appreciate it, even though it’s
easy to forget what a gift this is. If you’re able to sleep well, appreciate this. If your
lungs are healthy, appreciate the simple fact that you can breathe in and out easily.
The same goes for myriad things we can do every day but don’t take note of.
   When you su er, you can look deeply at your situation and nd the many
blessings that are already surrounding you. It is wonderful to sit with a pen and
paper and write down all the conditions for happiness that are already there,
already available to you right in this moment.
   When you do this, you have a rm foundation from which to better embrace and
transform your su ering. Transforming our su ering is like becoming an organic
gardener, one who does not discard the unwanted scraps from the kitchen or the
yard. Instead, the gardener composts these scraps so that they can nourish the
  ower. You can transform the unwanted garbage in you—your depression, fear,


despair, or anger—into the nourishing energy of peace and joy. Don’t throw away
or deny your su ering. Touch your su ering. Face it directly, and transformation is
within your reach.
   Negative habits can be changed. You can begin anew. Try to be fully aware of
your inner motivations for wanting to reach your healthy weight. Why do you want
to lose weight? Allow yourself to truly feel that life would be signi cantly better
without your weight problem, as you would feel better and become healthier. Your
intention to reach a healthy weight has to come from you—and from nobody else.
   You need to get back to the wisdom of balance and moderation. Think of balance
and moderation as seeds that lie dormant in your consciousness. Water them so
that they can grow and be strong. Attaining a healthy weight is your choice. And it
is a practice, not an idea.
The Fourth Noble Truth: You Can Follow a Mindful Path to a Healthy Weight
The mindful path to a healthy weight is not a diet that you go on and o . It does
not rely on any pills or potions. All it takes is your belief and a rmation that you
can follow a mindful path, and your willingness to commit to this path. Following
a mindful path means creating your own personal goals for healthy eating and
physical activity, goals that you believe you can carry out and live with, day after
day. These goals must be realistic for your own life’s demands. Over time, as you
progress on this mindful path, it becomes your way of living, one that allows you
to reach your healthier weight with great ease and confidence.
   Appreciate the lessons that your excess weight is o ering you. Your excess
weight is like a bell whose sound reminds you that your past actions, your past way
of living, did not serve you well. You can liberate yourself from the imprisonment,
struggle, and burden of your weight. Though you are not solely responsible for
your current state, you are the only one who is able to change it. You must act for
yourself. No one else can do this for you. The rst step is to be aware that you are
choosing to change.
   Bear in mind that everything is impermanent, including your extra weight. The
mindful path to healthy weight is to start living with mindfulness, which will help
you be more conscious of what you are thinking, seeing, hearing, feeling, eating,
and doing throughout the day.
   Take small steps toward change. Do not aim for unrealistic goals that require a
quantum leap. This usually sets you up for a vicious cycle of failure. Another


experience of failure is not what you need. Chances are that your past failures in
weight-loss attempts have reinforced the notion in you that you cannot do it.
   By accomplishing little steps, you start to have a taste of what you can do. You
begin to have a taste of success. Every day, allow yourself to witness that it is
possible for you to make changes in the right direction, no matter how small.
Success breeds success. It is contagious.
   Set a realistic goal for weight loss. For most of us, this means losing one to two
pounds a week. Losing weight steadily allows your new, healthy habits to be rmly
rooted. When you lose weight quickly with fad diets, you usually regain the lost
weight in a short time. The best approach is to establish healthy eating and
physical activity habits that you can stick with.
   There is a National Weight Control Registry of more than ve thousand women
and men who have each lost more than thirty pounds and kept it o for at least a
year.38 Most of them lost the weight on their own. How did they do it? They
exercised and burned an average of four hundred calories a day, which is about
sixty minutes of brisk walking. They ate less, keeping to about fourteen hundred
calories a day. Plus, they watched less television and limited their visits to fast-
food restaurants. There are other examples of success, from a fast-food chain’s
formerly overweight pitchman to people who participated in reality shows like The
Biggest Loser. The key is to be able to stick with eating well, eating less, and
moving more.
   Learning what to do to lose weight is not di cult. Putting that knowledge
e ectively into practice, though, is the key challenge. Despite advances in weight
management research over the past decades, people worldwide still struggle to
make the lasting lifestyle changes that would help them achieve and maintain a
healthier weight.
   So, what can help you begin to make healthy behavior changes and keep them up
over time?
   Mindfulness.
   Mindfulness is a way of living that has been practiced over twenty-six hundred
years by millions of people to help them transform their su ering into peace and
joy. Applying mindfulness to your su ering with weight gives you a catalyst that
you can draw on at will to change your behavior. Consider mindfulness as your
ally to help you get out of your own way, change your habits that are
counterproductive, and overcome the obstacles and di culties that led you to be


overweight.
   Start rst with practicing mindful breathing, mindful eating, and mindful walking
every day. We will explain these practices in chapters 4, 5, and 6. It may seem like
a lot to start with, but it doesn’t take much at this stage. We are already breathing
as long as we are alive, and we are eating and walking every day. Mindfulness is
simply a different way of breathing, eating, and walking.
   Don’t be discouraged if you nd yourself not being able to follow your plan 100
percent. As long as you are heading in the right direction, you are making progress.
Be patient with yourself. Even if you change only one unhealthy habit a week, you
will be making twenty-six changes in six months and fty-two changes in one year.
Act with determination. Practice diligently. Take one moment at a time.
   In addition to your personal mindfulness, you will need to look outside yourself
if you’re to reach a healthy weight. Besides your own will and action, you also
need support at home, at work, and throughout your community to be able to eat
well and stay active. If healthy choices are not available at work, it will be much
more di cult for you to eat a healthy lunch. If your community does not have any
food outlets besides convenience stores that do not stock many healthy choices, it
will be hard for you and your family to eat well.
   It is extremely challenging to change on your own. Build a support community or
sangha (the Sanskrit word for a Buddhist community of spiritual practitioners)
around you to help you stay on track. The support system can be made up of
people you meet with in person or online. Think of all the people you come into
contact with in your life. Which can be your potential allies, o ering you support
in the myriad of small daily actions? How about your family members, your
friends, your coworkers, and your health-care team? How about using the Web and
other tools to remind you to eat, move, and live mindfully? See appendix A to
download the mindfulness bell sound to your computer to remind you to come
back to the present moment. You may also want to have a digital watch or cell
phone that you can program to beep at regular intervals, say, every hour. The beep
can be a reminder for you to stop whatever you are doing and breathe deeply three
times. In all the practice centers in the tradition of Plum Village (Thich Nhat
Hanh’s monastery in France), whenever the phone rings or the clock chimes in the
dining hall, people stop everything they are doing and breathe consciously,
releasing all thinking and any tension.


Ending Your Struggle with Weight: The Path Begins Here
You have within you the wisdom, the strength, and the ability to follow through
with your plan to lose weight. Through reading this book, you will learn scienti c
facts that will help you eat more healthfully and be more active. You will learn
more about the internal and external obstacles that may have prevented you from
reaching your healthy weight in the past. You will know yourself much better than
before. You will see whether your thinking is working for you or against you. You
will realize that what you do every day for leisure and for work a ects your weight
and well-being. You will be more conscious of how your level of focus, the extent
of your mindfulness or mindlessness, and your commitment are all a ecting how
much you weigh.
   Make a serious pledge to yourself. Begin writing a personal healthy-weight
mission statement. This mission statement is a symbol and reminder of your
commitment and can help you see more clearly what you intend to achieve. As you
go through this healthy-weight journey, return to your healthy-weight mission
statement periodically to help you focus, get inspired, renew your ongoing
commitment, and stay on track. You may also like to post it where you can read it
often.
   Your mission statement for healthy weight and well-being should be made up of
concrete, achievable goals. It should begin broadly with what you want to achieve
overall and then have some more specific goals you can work toward along the way
to your ultimate goal. For example:
     My Mission Statement for Healthy Weight and Well-Being
       Through being more mindful and paying better attention to my health
     and well-being, I will lose 25 pounds by __________, and keep it o over the
     following year and beyond.(insert date)
       Beginning Goals, __________ (insert date)
             I will practice some level of mindfulness every day, with a goal of
             increasing the amount every week.
             I will walk at least 5,000 steps (measured by a pedometer) or half
             an hour every day, and slowly increase this each week until I reach
             10,000 steps or one hour per day.


            I will buy more fruits and vegetables.
            I will not buy any sugary sodas.
       Revised Goals, __________ (insert date)
            I will work on being mindful for at least two hours a day, with a
            goal of increasing the amount every week.
            I will walk at least 10,000 steps every day.
            I will buy more fruits and vegetables.
            I will avoid all fast food.
            I will not buy any sugary sodas.
  Mission statements are works in progress, just like ourselves. While the overall
goal of your mission statement will likely stay constant over time, the smaller goals
will change and be revised as you gain experience and gure out what you’ve been
successful with and what you still need to work on.
  As you think about your mission statement and the commitment you’ve made to
yourself, you can sometimes become overwhelmed by the larger goals. But
remember that those are the goals to be reached much further into your journey.
Right now, just stay focused on the individual steps that will get you moving
toward your goals. Instead of focusing just on the scale and your weight goal, stay
focused on your daily mind-set and actions moment to moment. Smile to yourself,
and feel good about every change that you can make, no matter how small. It takes
time and determination to transform the deeply entrenched habits that caused you
to gain weight.
  You are not expected to be able to change overnight. Just like a woodpecker that
has to keep pecking away to create a hole in the tree trunk, you need to focus and
keep practicing. Stay present in the now so that you are fully aware and can take
concrete steps in the direction of healthy eating and active living. To stay on this
route to health and well-being, you need to wake up from your autopilot mode.
You have to live deeply and with more awareness so that you can be attentive to
each moment. Mindfulness practice is the key that will help you free yourself from
unconsciousness and forgetfulness. Mindfulness can help you eat, move, and live
more consciously.
  In the beginning, it maybe di cult to change your daily routines. As you bring
more mindfulness into your daily living gradually and consistently, you will


increase your awareness of your daily activities. Before you fully realize it, mindful
living will become your new habit, part of your daily being.
   A bonus of practicing mindful living, as many others practicing mindfulness
throughout the centuries have found, is the sense of being more centered, more
joyful, more at peace with yourself. You will wonder why you have lived so much
of your life in numbness and forgetfulness. This numbness prevented you from
being fully conscious of what caused your su ering and undesirable states of mind
and body. This forgetfulness caused you to miss your appointment with life, out of
touch with all its beauty and wonders.
   By combining science-based advice with the practice of mindfulness, we have the
tools to transform the unhealthy habits that have led to our current weight. Our
mindfulness will lead us to adopt lifestyle choices that are not only good for
ourselves but also good for our planet. We will realize that we cannot attain well-
being all by ourselves. Our well-being is intimately dependent on the well-being of
others. Our health is dependent on the health of our planet, and the health of our
planet depends on us. We all need to consume and act in such a way that the
health of our planet is preserved for our children, our grandchildren, and all
future generations. We cannot focus just on ourselves if a future is to be possible.
We need to maintain the well-being of all. Each of us can contribute by mindfully
taking care of ourselves—and our home, planet Earth—for our generation and for
generations to come.




CHAPTER 2
Are You Really Appreciating the Apple?
                          An Apple Meditation
                  The apple in your hand is the body of the Cosmos.
                                                           –Thich Nhat Hanh
LET’S HAVE A TASTE of mindfulness. Take an apple out of your
refrigerator. Any apple will do. Wash it. Dry it. Before taking a bite,
pause for a moment. Look at the apple in your palm and ask
yourself: When I eat an apple, am I really enjoying eating it? Or am
I so preoccupied with other thoughts that I miss the delights that
the apple offers me?
   If you are like most of us, you answer yes to the second question
much more often than the first. For most of our lives, we have eaten
apple after apple without giving it a second thought. Yet in this
mindless way of eating, we have denied ourselves the many delights
present in the simple act of eating an apple. Why do that,
especially when it is so easy to truly enjoy the apple?
   The rst thing is to give your undivided attention to eating the
apple. When you eat the apple, just concentrate on eating the
apple. Don’t think of anything else. And most important, be still.
Don’t eat the apple while you are driving. Don’t eat it while you
are walking. Don’t eat it while you are reading. Just be still. Being
focused and slowing down will allow you to truly savor all the
qualities the apple o ers: its sweetness, aroma, freshness, juiciness,
and crispness.
   Next, pick up the apple from the palm of your hand and take a
moment to look at it again. Breathe in and out a few times
consciously to help yourself focus and become more in touch with
how you feel about the apple. Most of the time, we barely look at


the apple we are eating. We grab it, take a bite, chew it quickly,
and then swallow. This time, take note: What kind of apple is it?
What color is it? How does it feel in your hand? What does it smell
like? Going through these thoughts, you will begin to realize that
the apple is not simply a quick snack to quiet a grumbling stomach.
It is something more complex, something part of a greater whole.
   Then, give the apple a smile and, slowly, take a bite, and chew it.
Be aware of your in-breath and out-breath a few times to help
yourself concentrate solely on eating the apple: what it feels like in
your mouth; what it tastes like; what it’s like to chew and swallow
it. There is nothing else lling your mind as you chew—no projects,
no deadlines, no worries, no “to do” list, no fears, no sorrow, no
anger, no past, and no future. There is just the apple.
   When you chew, know what you are chewing. Chew slowly and
completely, twenty to thirty times for each bite. Chew consciously,
savoring the taste of the apple and its nourishment, immersing
yourself in the experience 100 percent. This way, you really
appreciate the apple as it is. And as you become fully aware of
eating the apple, you also become fully aware of the present
moment. You become fully engaged in the here and now. Living in
the moment, you can really receive what the apple o ers you, and
you become more alive.
   By eating the apple this way, truly savoring it, you have a taste of
mindfulness, the state of awareness that comes from being fully
immersed in the present moment. Letting go for those few short
minutes and living in the here and now, you can begin to sense the
pleasure and freedom from anxiety that a life lived in mindfulness
can offer.
   In today’s world, mindless eating and mindless living are all too
common. We are propelled by the fast pace of high-tech living—
highspeed Internet, e-mails, instant messages, and cell phones—and
the expectation that we are always on call, always ready to respond
instantly to any message we get. Thirty years ago, hardly anyone
would have expected to receive a reply to a phone call or letter
within the same day. Yet today, the pace of our lives is utterly


harried and spinning out of control. We constantly have to respond
to external stimuli and demands. We have less and less time to stop,
stay focused, and re ect on whatever is in front of us. We have
much less time to be in touch with our inner selves—our thoughts,
feelings, consciousness, and how and why we have become the way
we are, for better or worse. And our lives suffer because of it.
   Some of us nd that it is too inconvenient and di cult to eat a
whole apple. So major food outlets now sell “value-added” apples
—presliced apples, packed in bags and coated with an all-natural
  avorless sealant so that they won’t turn brown or lose their
crispness for up to three weeks. These apples epitomize the new
food-marketing concept of “snackability”:1 There are no crumbs and
no fuss, nothing to interrupt the repetitive movement of hand to
bag and food to mouth. Aside from the inherent lack of freshness in
these “snackable” precut apples, they also promote mindless eating
—in the car, in front of the TV, at the computer, whenever and
wherever. And while there are certainly much less healthy snack
foods than precut apple slices, the pattern of eating is one we all
experience and that food marketers promote with a vengeance.
   Most of the time, we are eating on autopilot, eating on the run,
eating our worries or anxieties from the day’s demands,
anticipations, irritations, and “to do” lists. If we are not conscious of
the food we eat, if we are not actively thinking about that apple,
how can we taste it and get the pleasure of eating it?
   Eating an apple mindfully is not only a pleasant experience; it is
good for our health as well. The adage “An apple a day keeps the
doctor away” is actually backed by solid science. Research shows
that eating apples can help prevent heart disease because the ber
and antioxidants they contain can prevent cholesterol buildup in
the blood vessels of the heart. The ber in apples can also help
move waste through the intestines, which can help lower the risk of
problems such as irritable bowel syndrome. Eating the apple with
the skin—especially when it is organic—is better than eating it
without the skin, as half of the vitamin C is under the apple’s skin;
the skin itself is rich in phytochemicals, special plant compounds


that may ght chronic disease. Apples are also packed with
potassium, which can help keep blood pressure under control.
   Beyond the health bene ts and pleasure an apple can provide,
when we view the apple on an even grander scale we can see it as
a representative of our cosmos. Look deeply at the apple in your
hand and you see the farmer who tended the apple tree; the
blossom that became the fruit; the fertile earth, the organic material
from decayed remains of prehistoric marine animals and algae, and
the hydrocarbons themselves; the sunshine, the clouds, and the rain.
Without the combination of these far-reaching elements and
without the help of many people, the apple would simply not
exist.
   At its most essential, the apple you hold is a manifestation of the
wonderful presence of life. It is interconnected with all that is. It
contains the whole universe; it is an ambassador of the cosmos
coming to nourish our existence. It feeds our body, and if we eat it
mindfully, it also feeds our soul and recharges our spirit.
   Eating an apple consciously is to have a new awareness of the
apple, of our world, and of our own life. It celebrates nature,
honoring what Mother Earth and the cosmos have o ered us. Eating
an apple with mindfulness is a meditation and can be deeply
spiritual. With this awareness and insight, you begin to have a
greater feeling of gratitude for and appreciation of the food you eat,
and your connection to nature and all others in our world. As the
apple becomes more real and vibrant, your life becomes more real
and vibrant. Savoring the apple is mindfulness at work.
   And it is mindfulness that will help you reconnect with yourself
and become healthier in mind, body, and spirit now and in the
future.




CHAPTER 3
You Are More Than What You Eat
           When something has come to be, we have to acknowledge its
           presence and look deeply into its nature. When we look deeply, we
           will discover the kinds of nutriments that have helped it come to be
           and that continue to feed it.
                                                       —Samyutta Nikaya 2, 47
ADVANCES IN SCIENTIFIC RESEARCH since the late twentieth
century reinforce the understanding that our bodies a ect our minds
and our minds a ect our bodies. Skipping breakfast has been
shown to dull students’ memories and lower their test scores.1 And
physical activity has been shown to sharpen thinking, reduce
anxiety, reduce depression, and enhance memory.2 The mind also
has a powerful e ect on our bodies. In stressful situations—like
being approached by a bear in a national park—our brains kick in
the ght-or- ight response to help us cope with the threat. Our
sympathetic nervous system is recruited, stimulating the release of
glucagon and cortisol hormones to increase fuel to our muscles and
our brain, helping us to make the right decision and escape danger.
More recently, research has found that the risk of heart disease
increases in both men and women as levels of anxiety, anger, or
more general symptoms of distress increase.3 Therefore, to attain
well-being, we need to take care not only of our bodies but also of
our minds. Mindfulness practice is central to seeing the
interdependence of mind and body.
  The same applies to weight control. Getting weight under control
certainly means paying attention to the body—making more
healthy food choices, cutting back on the amount of food we eat,
and exercising more. But none of these bodily changes can happen,
or can be sustained in the long term, if our minds aren’t well fed


with nourishing thoughts that help us stay on track—and that
address the issues that caused us to gain weight in the first place.
The four nutriments taught by the Buddha provide the path for doing just this.
   When most scientists think of nutriments, they think of foods such
as nuts, fruits, and vegetables; drinks such as juice or milk; and
nutrients such as protein, fats, carbohydrates, vitamins, and
minerals. Buddhist teaching, however, o ers a more inclusive way
of looking at nutriments. Besides edible food and drink—the
nutrients that sustain our bodies and feed our brain—there are three
other types of nutriments that enable us to preserve the health and
well-being of our body and our mind. These other nutriments are
the following:
             SENSE IMPRESSIONS: what we see, hear, taste, smell, touch, and
             think
             VOLITION: our inner motivations, our deepest desires
             CONSCIOUSNESS: the totality of everything we have thought, said,
             or done throughout our lives as well as the knowledge, habits,
             talents, and perceptions of our ancestors. Thus consciousness is
             both individual and collective.
If we experience a problem in our body or a disturbance in our
feelings, our mind, or our consciousness, we need to identify what
types of nutriments we have been feeding ourselves that have led to
our negative state. Once we have identi ed those nutriments, we
can stop ingesting them and, in turn, heal the problem areas. For
example, if we nd ourselves easily getting angry, agitated, or sad,
which then causes us to eat too much out of frustration, we need to
look deeply to see what has brought about our anger, agitation, or
sadness: What foods have we eaten? What types of sensory input
have we taken in? What are the intentions that drive us, and what is
the state of our consciousness, in this moment and as an
accumulation of experience over the course of our life? Maybe we
have read glossy magazines full of advertisements for clothes and


accessories we cannot a ord and do not need, and this has made us
feel anxious and inadequate. Maybe we are frustrated that loved
ones don’t act as we wish, which lls us with anger and resentment.
Once we identify what nutriments we are consuming that are
harming us or others, we can work to change our actions and nd
healthier ways to deal with our obstacles. This will not only help
with our well-being but also keep us from gulping down calories to
deal with our difficult emotions.
The First Nutriment: Edible Food and Drinks
The rst nutriment is essential for our well-being. What we eat and
drink, and the way we eat and drink, profoundly a ect our physical
and mental well-being. That is why it is essential to know which
foods and drinks promote health and which foods and drinks harm
us. Nutrition research over the past fty years has found that
maintaining a healthy eating pattern can reduce our risk of major
chronic diseases including diabetes, heart disease, obesity, and
cancer. This scientific nutrition advice is summarized in chapter 5.
   As modern society has learned more and more about what
constitutes a healthy diet, our current food industry system has
become more and more complex. We no longer grow our own
food, and we rarely buy our foods from local farms o ering
basically whole foods with minimal processing and no pesticides.
Nowadays, most of us buy foods from supermarkets that have tens
of thousands of items for us to choose from.4 Each year, the U.S.
population spends roughly 10 percent of its income on food—
roughly one trillion dollars in 2008 alone.5 And each year,
thousands of new foods and drinks are introduced. Many of these
products are highly processed and loaded with sugar, salt, or
refined carbohydrates, which compromise our health.
   The choices are mind-boggling. Walking down supermarket aisles
at eye level, you nd many varieties of snack foods such as cookies,
snack and cereal bars, chips, and drinks that have a long list of
unrecognizable ingredients. Though some may make nutritional


claims that they are high or low in certain nutrients and are good
for you, these claims can be deceiving. For example, a cereal bar
may be enriched with vitamins and minerals, but it likely contains
too much sugar and re ned carbohydrate to be considered a healthy
choice. In this world of abundant choices that are designed to
appeal to our tastes and our desire for convenience, if we are not
mindful as we scan the supermarket shelves, we could end up
buying and consuming foods and drinks that insidiously hurt our
health without our being aware of it.
   Mindfulness also helps us look beyond the packaging to see how
we grow and where we get our food, so that we can eat in a way
that preserves our collective well-being and the well-being of our
planet. If we do not take care of our planet, we will not have the
adequate sunshine, air, temperature, rain, clean water, and
wholesome soil needed to grow our food. Instead we will have
unwholesome and contaminated foods that harm our body, our
mind, and our world. We have to know what we are eating, where
our food is from, and how it affects us.
   The Buddha speci cally advised us to eat mindfully so that we
can maintain compassion in our hearts and ensure a good future for
the next generations. He taught that if we take a shortsighted and
sel sh approach to the food and drink we consume, we will hurt
not only ourselves but also our children and our planet.
   One teaching from the Buddha that addresses this issue directly is
the Sutra on the Son’s Flesh. This parable may sound unimaginable,
cruel, and totally unacceptable. But it contains a powerful lesson
about the foods we consume and the future of our planet.
    Sutra on the Son’s Flesh
      A young couple and their three-year-old son had to cross a vast desert and
    move to another country, where they wanted to seek asylum. They were not
    familiar with the terrain, nor did they know how long the journey would take,
    and they ran out of food while they were only halfway through the desert.
    They realized that without enough food, all three of them would die in the


    desert, with no hope of reaching the country on the other side of the desert.
    After agonizing re ection, the husband and wife made the decision to kill
    their little son for food. Each day they ate a small morsel of his esh in order
    to have enough energy to move on, and they carried the rest of their son’s
     esh on their shoulders so that it could continue to dry in the sun. Each time
    when they nished eating a morsel of their son’s esh, the couple looked at
    each other and asked, “Where is our beloved child now?”
      Having told this tragic story, the Buddha looked at the monks and asked, “Do
    you think that this couple was happy to eat their son’s esh?” “No, World-
    Honored One. The couple su ered when they had to eat their son’s esh,” the
    monks answered. The Buddha taught the following lesson: “Dear friends, we
    have to practice eating in such a way that we can maintain compassion in our
    hearts. We have to eat in mindfulness. If not, we may be eating the esh of our
    own children.”
  The story may be extreme, but we need to wake up so that we
are not, albeit guratively, consuming our children’s esh and
experiencing the pain of the couple. In fact, much of the world’s
su ering comes from not eating mindfully, from not looking deeply
into what and how we eat. This mindless eating can lead to the
weight we gain and the diseases caused by poor nutrition, and it
takes a toll on the health of the planet also. We have to learn ways
to eat that preserve the health and well-being of our body, our
spirit, and our planet. (Appendix B contains the sutra in its entirety,
see p. 241.)
  Looking deeply at the way we eat from a global perspective, we
can see that meat production is a huge drain on the planet. The
United Nations report Livestock’s Long Shadow, an in-depth
assessment of the damaging impact of livestock on our
environment, concluded that livestock’s negative e ect on our
environment is massive and that we need to address it with
urgency. The report estimates that raising livestock uses 8 percent
of our planet’s water and contributes strongly to water depletion
and pollution.6 Some scientists have estimated that it takes one
hundred times as much water to produce a kilogram of beef as it


does to produce a kilogram of protein from grain.7 Part of the
reason that so much water is needed to produce livestock is that
cattle are fattened on vast amounts of grain, which requires water to
grow. In the United States, cattle consume seven times as much
grain as the U.S. population as a whole.8 An Environmental
Protection Agency report on U.S. agricultural crop production in
2000 states that, according to the National Corn Growers
Association, about 80 percent of all corn grown in the United States
is consumed by domestic and overseas livestock, poultry, and sh
production.9 Yet, ironically, more than nine thousand children die
each day from causes related to hunger and undernutrition.10 It is a
painful realization that the grain and resources we use to raise
livestock could be used more directly instead to feed the starving
and malnourished children in the world.
   Furthermore, a 2008 report by the Pew Charitable Trust and the
Johns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health found that
factory farming in the United States is taking a heavy toll on human
health and the health of the environment—and that keeping
livestock in these “concentrated animal feeding operations”
constitutes inhumane treatment.11 Animal waste pollutes the water
and air around the farms, causing illness among farmworkers and
farm neighbors, as well as land degradation. Heavy use of
antibiotics in factory farming leads to new strains of viruses and
bacteria resistant to antibiotics, creating “superbugs” that may pose
a public health threat to us all. In the report, the experts
recommended phasing out and banning the use of antibiotics in
farm animals except for the treatment of disease, instituting tighter
regulation of factory farm waste, and phasing out intensive
confinement systems.12
   The devastating environmental and societal impact of raising
livestock goes beyond the use of water and land to grow food. Our
society’s hunger for meat contributes mightily to the production of
climate-changing greenhouse gases. The livestock industry is
responsible for 18 percent of the world’s greenhouse gas emissions,


a higher share than the entire transportation sector.13 Seventy
percent of forests in the Amazon have been cut to provide grazing
land for cattle, and when such forests are destroyed, enormous
amounts of carbon dioxide stored in trees are released into the
atmosphere.14 The meat, dairy, and egg industries are also
responsible for two-thirds of human-induced emissions of ammonia,
which in turn plays a role in acid rain and the acidi cation of our
ecosystem.15
   The data suggest that one of the best ways to alleviate the stress
on our environment is to consume less meat and eat more plant-
based food, which results in reduction in greenhouse gas emissions.
We do not need cattle to process the food for us. It is much better
and more e cient for us to eat more plant-based food and process
it ourselves. It may seem like a huge change for many people, but
reducing the amount of meat and dairy in your diet is a great way
to keep your weight in check, improve your overall health, and
take steps toward improving the health of our planet. When we
learn to eat more vegetables, grains, and beans mindfully, we will
enjoy their taste, and we can be happy knowing that we are
supporting a new kind of society in which there is enough food for
everyone and no one will have to suffer from hunger.
   We must take urgent action at the individual and collective levels.
For individuals, going toward vegetarianism can have great weight
and health bene ts. Vegans and vegetarians tend to weigh less than
people who consume animal products; they also tend to have lower
risk of heart disease, diabetes, and some cancers.16 In chapter 5, we
go into greater detail about the health benefits of plant-based diets.
   Many Buddhist traditions encourage vegetarianism. Although this
practice is primarily based on the wish to nourish compassion
toward animals, it also o ers many health bene ts. Now we also
know that when we eat vegetarian, we protect the earth and help
reduce the greenhouse e ect that is causing her serious and
irreversible damage. Even if you cannot be 100 percent vegetarian,
being a part-time vegetarian and consuming a more plant-based
diet is already better for your own health as well as the health of


our shared planet. You may want to start by eating vegetarian for a
few days a month, or you can eat vegetarian only for breakfast and
lunch every day. This way, you are already more than half
vegetarian. If you feel that you cannot eliminate animal products
from your diet for even one meal, simply reducing the portion of
meat and eliminating processed meats like bacon, sausages, and
ham can lower your risk of colon cancer and your risk of dying an
early death from heart disease, cancer, or other causes.17 This is a
good rst step to adopting a more plant-based, healthful,
environmentally friendly diet.
   Using mindfulness to look deeply at what you eat can make it
much easier to make such changes, because you realize the bene ts
they can bring to the planet and yourself—lower weight, lower risk
of colon cancer and heart disease, and more energy for doing the
things you enjoy. We are “interbeings”: we and our environment are
interdependent. And even small changes on our part can have a
large impact when combined with others. Our market economy is
driven primarily by consumer demand. As a population, if a large
number of people make even small moves to eat less meat and
more plant-based foods, the livestock industry will shrink. Over
time, farmers will nd other crops to support their livelihoods.
Through such collective awakening we can make a difference in our
world.
Second Nutriment: Sense Impressions
Sense impressions arise from the sensory activities and responses of
the six sense organs, the six sense objects, and the six sense
consciousnesses. The six sense organs are the eyes, ears, nose,
tongue, body, and mind. The six sense objects are form, sounds,
smells, tastes, tactile objects, and mental objects, or objects of mind.
The six sense consciousnesses are eye consciousness (or sight), ear
consciousness (or hearing), nose consciousness (or smelling), taste
consciousness (or tasting), body consciousness (or touching), and
mind consciousness (thinking). Objects of mind include all


physiological, physical, and psychological aspects of our senses.
   What we see, hear, smell, taste, touch, and think, all that we
sense in our body and all that we become aware of in our mind, is
food for our sense consciousnesses. Throughout our waking hours,
our six sense organs are actively engaged. The nutriments we ingest
through our six senses can be either healthful or harmful—
especially when it comes to our attempts to reach a healthier
weight. Think of a day in your life. As you get up, you turn on the
radio and your favorite piece of music is playing. Because your ears
are functioning well, you can hear the music, and you feel good and
lighthearted. That piece of music lingers in your consciousness, and
for the next few hours you nd yourself humming it and smiling to
yourself. During your lunchtime walk, you hear that same piece of
music on your MP3 player, and it brings a lightness and energy to
your step. You walk by a bus that has an ad on its side promoting a
new television thriller series, and you store the information in your
consciousness. After work, you stop at the supermarket, intending
to buy some healthful food for dinner, and you pick up a magazine
at the checkout counter. Flipping through the pages, you see an ad
for fancy chocolate, and the woman who eats it looks relaxed as she
enjoys this indulgence. As you wait in line, you can see and smell
the chocolates that line the checkout aisle, and you decide to throw
a few chocolate bars into your cart. That evening, you turn on the
television to watch the thriller advertised on the bus that you
noticed during your afternoon walk. As you watch the program, you
become tense and edgy because there are many scary, suspenseful
scenes. You then crave chocolate and decide to eat a chocolate bar
before you go to bed, since somewhere in your consciousness you
have the impression that chocolate can help you relax. That night,
you have a vivid dream lled with suspense and fear. You wake up
tense. You take another chocolate bar along with you to work to
snack on at your desk during the day.
   Mass media is the food for our eyes, ears, and minds. When we
watch television, read a magazine, watch a lm, or play a video
game, we are consuming sensory impressions. Many of the images


we are exposed to through the media water unwholesome seeds of
craving, fear, anger, and violence in our consciousness. The images,
sounds, and ideas that are toxic can rob our body and consciousness
of their well-being. If you feel anxious, fearful, or depressed, it may
be because you have taken in too many toxins through your senses
without even knowing it. Be mindful of what you watch, read, and
listen to, and protect yourself from the fear, despair, anger, craving,
anxiety, or violence they promote. The material goods they promise
are only quick, temporary fixes. True contentment lies within.
   In the United States, consumerism dominates our culture. We are
able to shop around the clock, thanks to the Internet and twenty-
four-hour stores. The same is true for foods: we can buy food
anywhere and at any time. And we don’t really ever stop and ask
ourselves: Why are we buying so much? Do we really need all this
“stuff”? Why are we eating so much? Are we truly hungry?
   We all really need to take a step back and take a deep look at
what our true needs are. And one way to help do this is to become
mindful observers of the market-driven, ad-driven world we live in.
Advertising is designed to create a need where one does not exist—
and it must work, because companies spend hundreds of billions of
dollars a year on it.18 Often in commercials, buying a certain food
or gadget is portrayed as an antidote to loneliness or insecurity.
People in commercials consuming fast food or ice cream all appear
to be so happy when they are eating these products, so ful lled and
vibrant. We absorb and store these perceptions and messages in our
consciousness without censoring their content. Later, we nd
ourselves consuming these foods, even though we know they can
cause us harm. And we wonder why.
   We can choose to resist these messages—but it will be easier if
we mindfully choose to limit our exposure to such messages. Turn
o the television. Stop mindlessly reading glossy magazines.
Children especially need protection from the media, since their
minds simply are not mature enough to understand that advertisers
are deliberately trying to in uence them.19 We also need to shield
ourselves and our children from unwholesome lms, TV programs,


and video games, in addition to advertisements, because they can
  ll us with anxiety, violence, and craving. They can also ll us with
stress, and stress may, in turn, contribute to weight gain.20 When we
spend a lot of time in the sun, we can wear sunscreen to protect
ourselves from harmful ultraviolet rays while still being able to
enjoy the warmth of the sun. In the same way, mindfulness is the
shield that can protect us from these corrosive and stressful
messages in our everyday environment while helping us lter and
choose positive, wholesome sense impressions that water seeds of
happiness and peace in our consciousness so that we are less likely
to eat out of our negative emotions.
   Learning to mindfully consume sensory impressions can help us
reduce our craving, anger, fear, sadness, and stress. And all of this
may ultimately help us in our quest to achieve healthier weight.
Third Nutriment: Volition
The third kind of food is volition, or will—our deepest desire to
obtain whatever it is that we want. What we want drives our daily
actions. What we want also determines our personal aspirations.
We have to ask ourselves: What is my deepest desire in this life?
We have to look deeply into ourselves to see what kind of energy
motivates us in our daily life. We all want to go somewhere or
realize something. What is the purpose of our life? Our desire can
take us in the direction of happiness or in the direction of su ering.
Desire is a kind of food that nourishes us and gives us energy. If we
have a healthy desire, such as a wish to save or protect life, care for
our environment, or live a simple, balanced life with time to take
care of ourselves and our loved ones, our desire will bring us
happiness.
   Everyone wants happiness, and there is a strong energy in us
pushing us toward what we think will make us happy. But we may
also su er a lot because of this relentless pursuit. There are those of
us who believe that happiness is possible only when we gain a lot
of money, fame, and power. Yet these things can be su ering


disguised as happiness, as they are often built on the su ering of
others. For instance, the opium and slave trade in icted tremendous
human su ering around the world. Or a modern-day version of the
slave trade: the global sex trade, which dehumanizes young women
and children from many countries who are forced to work in
foreign countries in the booming sex industry, sometimes with legal
“entertainment visas,” as in the case of Japan. The desire to make
money, in and of itself, is not a bad thing if your pursuit of material
wealth does not harm anyone along the way and if you use your
money in a compassionate way. It’s important to look deeply at our
desires and see if they are built on positive or negative intentions.
This can help us steer our desires toward those things that are
bene cial to others, to the world, to our family, and also to
ourselves.
   In a 1999 meditation retreat for business leaders, many
participants shared stories of how people with great wealth and
power also su er tremendously. A very wealthy businessman said
that despite having over three hundred thousand employees, with
operations in many parts of the world, he was extremely lonely.
This man’s loneliness, and the loneliness of many wealthy people,
stems from being suspicious of others. They feel that those who
want to befriend them do so because of their money and only want
to take advantage of them. They feel lonely because they do not
have any real friends. Children of wealthy people also su er
deeply; often their parents have no time for them because they are
so preoccupied with maintaining their wealth and social status. The
su ering of many wealthy people shows us that money cannot buy
us true happiness.
   Our deepest desire is the basis of all our actions, including our
career. If you want to be a doctor and heal people, you will focus
your energy and prepare yourself for many years, going through
demanding training in medical school, internship, and residency to
become a board-certi ed doctor. After you become a doctor, you
forget about the hard work and many sleepless nights, and instead
simply feel good about the contribution you are making to society.


Unfortunately, there are many other professionals whose primary
desire is just to make more money for themselves. The fund
managers who advanced personal monetary gains for themselves
during the 2008 housing bubble are now left with the realization
that they had a major role to play in the crumbling of the world
economy, causing many people around the world to become
homeless and jobless. Can they be truly at peace with themselves,
living with this realization?
   We must look deeply into the nature of our volition to see
whether it is pushing us in the direction of liberation from su ering
and toward peace and compassion, or in the direction of a iction
and misery. What is it that we really want deep in our heart? Is it
money, fame, power? Or is it finding inner peace, being able to live
life fully and enjoy the present moment? Happiness reveals itself
when we are at peace with ourselves. We are not happy because
we weigh more than we should. But weight by itself may not be the
underlying cause of our unhappiness.
   Desire is often at the root of weight problems: our desire to eat
too much tasty food, our desire to avoid di cult emotions by
distracting our minds with snacks and television, our desire to work
long hours at the o ce for career advancement, leaving us little
time to go to the gym or walk in nature. How do we balance all
these desires or set priorities for them?
   Taking a deep, mindful look at our true desire can help direct us
on the right path to well-being. By observing the interdependent
nature of our eating problems, and our volition to achieve well-
being, we can certainly identify and change conditions that will
bring about inner peace and joy.
Fourth Nutriment: Consciousness
Every day our thoughts, words, and actions ow into the sea of our
consciousness. Our sense perceptions are continuously feeding our
consciousness. The imprints of all our experience and perceptions
are stored as seeds in the deepest level of our mind, called the store


consciousness. There are also seeds that contain the inherited habit
energies of all our ancestors and a ect our pattern of seeing,
feeling, and thinking. As long as they are in store consciousness,
they are still sleeping and lying dormant. But when watered, these
seeds have the capacity to manifest in our daily lives as full-grown
energies. When you plant a ower seed in the spring, by summer a
plant will mature and bear owers; from these owers new seeds
are born, and the cycle continues. Similarly, seeds of compassion,
joy, and hope, as well as seeds of sorrow, fear, and despair, can
grow in the eld of our mind. The germinating seeds grow into the
upper level of the mind, called the mind consciousness. Mind
consciousness—our everyday, waking state of consciousness—should
be like a gardener, mindfully attending to the garden, the store
consciousness. The gardener has only to cultivate the earth and
water the seeds, and the garden will nourish the seeds to bring forth
the fruit.
   Our mind is the foundation of all our actions, whether they are
actions of body, speech, or mind, i.e., thinking. Whatever we think,
say, or do arises from our mind. What our consciousness consumes
becomes the substance of our life, so we have to be very careful
which nutriments we ingest. In describing the second nutriment, we
talked about sensory impressions and the need to guard our senses.
Our senses are sometimes referred to as gates because all the objects
of our perception enter our consciousness through sensory contact
with them. The mind consciousness, the gardener, has to be an
attentive guard at these gates of our senses and carefully choose
which sense impressions to allow in. Mind consciousness must also
recognize and identify the wholesome seeds in store consciousness,
practice day and night to care for and water those wholesome seeds
and help them grow, as well as prevent any negative seeds from
being watered. The way we do this is through mindfulness.
   According to Buddhist psychology, when a seed rises up from
store consciousness into our mind consciousness it becomes a
mental formation. Formation is a technical term meaning
something that manifests itself based on conditions—a composite of


di erent elements or attributes joining together when the
conditions are ripe. A ower is a physical formation of several
elements: seed, rain, sunshine, earth, air, space, time, and so on.
When these elements come together under the right conditions, a
flower manifests itself.
   Regarding the fourth nutriment, we are speaking not about
physical formations that make up the food of our consciousness but
about mental formations. Fear is a mental formation. It is composed
of several mental and emotional elements: anxiety, doubts,
insecurity, misperceptions, and ignorance. Despair, anger, love, and
mindfulness are other examples of mental formations. These are
merely symbols or names that we use to describe the experience
resulting from the interactions between our sense organs and their
sense objects, which give rise to all kinds of mind states, including
responses to thoughts, feelings, perceptions, mental trauma, and
memories.
   Lying deep down at the bottom of the store consciousness are all
kinds of seeds. All mental formations are buried in the form of
seeds in the soil of our store consciousness and can manifest
themselves on the upper level of consciousness, the mind
consciousness. There are many di erent kinds of seeds living in
store consciousness, both wholesome and unwholesome.
Wholesome seeds include seeds of love, gratitude, forgiveness,
generosity, happiness, and joy. Unwholesome seeds include hatred,
discrimination, jealousy, anger, and craving. For example, our
hatred is a mental formation. When it is not manifesting itself, we
do not feel hate. However, that does not mean that the seed of hate
is not in us. All of us have the seed of hate in our store
consciousness. We can be very openhearted and loving and not feel
any hate at all. However, if we encounter an unjust, oppressive, or
humiliating situation that waters the seed of hatred in our store
consciousness, hate will begin to sprout and grow into a zone of
energy in our mind consciousness. Previously hate was just a seed,
but once it has been watered, it develops and becomes the mental
formation of hate. We then become angry and full of ill will,


experiencing hateful thoughts and physical tension.
   Whenever a seed manifests itself in our mind consciousness, we
absorb it as food for our consciousness, the fourth nutriment. If we
allow anger to come up into our mind consciousness and stay for a
whole hour, for that whole hour we are eating anger. The more we
eat anger, the more the seed of anger in our store consciousness
grows. If you have a friend who understands you well and o ers
you words of comfort and kindness, the seed of loving-kindness will
arise in your mind consciousness. If you are in the company of that
kind friend for one hour, then during that time you are consuming a
whole hour of loving-kindness. Any seed, wholesome or
unwholesome, that has an opportunity to manifest itself as a mental
formation at the level of the mind is strengthened at its root in store
consciousness. Therefore, we must learn to nurture wholesome
seeds and to tame unwholesome ones with mindfulness, because
when they return to the store consciousness, they become stronger
regardless of their nature.
   We can take care not to water our unwholesome seeds—such as
anger, despair, and hopelessness—by being mindful of situations
that can elicit them. These situations may be from images we see in
the mass media or conversations we hear—either in our interactions
with others or over the airwaves. Furthermore, we can help each
other water the wholesome seeds in our store consciousness by
being kind, thoughtful, and understanding of others. When we
water seeds of forgiveness, acceptance, and happiness in the people
we love, we are giving them very healthy food for their
consciousness. But if we constantly water the seeds of hatred,
craving, and anger in our loved ones, we are poisoning them.
   Only by looking deeply into the nature of our su ering can we
discover its causes and identify the nutriments that have brought it
into being. After we have practiced for some time, we will see that
transformation always takes place in the depths of our
consciousness; our store consciousness is the support, the base for
our consciousness. If we know how to acknowledge and recognize
the presence of the mental formation, embrace it, calm it, and look


deeply into it, we will gain insight. This insight can liberate us and
transform our a ictions in their form as seeds, so that they no
longer arise in mind consciousness.
   How does this relate to our di culty with weight? We must nd
the source of our desire to eat too much of the wrong foods.
Perhaps we eat out of sadness; perhaps we eat out of our fears for
the future. If we cut the sources of nutriment for our sadness and
fear, sadness and fear will wither and weaken, and with them the
urge to overeat. The Buddha said that if we know how to look
deeply into our su ering and recognize its source of food, we are
already on the path of emancipation. The way out of our su ering
is through mindfulness of consumption—all forms of consumption,
and not just edible foods and drinks.
   When fear, despair, anger, or pain is active in our consciousness,
we can draw on mindfulness to bring us relief. If anger, fear, and
despair are dormant, they will not be perceptible in our
consciousness, and our life will be much more pleasant. Yet we
ingest the toxins of violence, fear, and anger every day from our
environment, including the media. We also ingest unwholesome
interactions with others or painful memories from the past. So the
negative seeds are frequently watered and become stronger and
stronger. These negative emotions of anger, fear, and violence then
become an integral part of our everyday lives, blinding us from
seeing things clearly and keeping us in ignorance, which is the
cause of su ering. However, if by cutting o their food or
nutriments we do not allow these seeds of negative emotions to
grow, we will not be overcome by violence, fear, or anger. And we
will not be driven to overeat. (See figure 3.1.)
   In our store consciousness, we also have the seed of mindfulness.
If we water the seed of mindfulness often, it will grow stronger.
Because all the seeds are interdependent in nature—the state of one
seed can in uence the state of all others—a strong mindfulness
energy can help us transform our negative emotions. This
mindfulness energy is like a torch helping us to see clearly the true
nature of our su ering. It also provides energy to manifest our seeds


of wisdom, forgiveness, and compassion so that ultimately we can
free ourselves from our su ering. Without wisdom, forgiveness, and
compassion, happiness and peace will not be possible. Suppose we
are standing in front of the refrigerator after encountering a splash
of anger from a family member. We are not hungry, because it is
only an hour or so after dinner. We have a choice. Either we can be
totally consumed by the unpleasant incident, get distressed, and
then assuage our hurt feelings with food from the refrigerator, or
we can mindfully tender the unpleasant emotions and recognize
that overeating would lead us to feel even worse later—ashamed
for abandoning once again our commitment to eat more mindfully
—and would not help us resolve the hurt feelings from our quarrel
with our family member. Mindfulness helps us free ourselves from
dwelling on the unpleasant incident and stops any thoughts of
revenge or overeating as it waters the seeds of wisdom and
compassion in us. When we pause with mindfulness, we recognize
that our family member must be su ering somehow. If one is
happy and peaceful, one would not behave with such anger.
Mindfulness practice can help reveal this kind of insight, which can
free us from the imprisonment of past events so that we can make
clear choices to help us manage our weight.
                Figure 3.1 SEEDS OF MINDFULNESS




   Collective consciousness is also a powerful source of nutriment. If
we allow ourselves to be in an environment day after day where
the collective energy of anger, despair, hate, or discrimination is
powerful, then sooner or later this source of nutriment will
penetrate into our body and consciousness and imprison us. We
should avoid associating with individuals and groups of people
who do not know how to recognize, embrace, and transform their
energy of hate, discrimination, or anger. It is important that we
select a good environment, a good neighborhood for us and for our
children. Such an environment will help nourish our ideals and our
wholesome volition, keeping us healthy, joyful, and happy.
   In the light of the teaching concerning the third and fourth
sources of nutriment, we see that it’s bene cial to look for and to
live with people who share the same ideal, intention, and purpose.
This is a sangha, a community that generates positive collective
energy and is motivated to support one another to change harmful
habits into bene cial ones. Everyone in the sangha does so by
learning to practice restraint, observe the law of moderation, and
share happiness, thereby bringing a spiritual and ethical dimension
into their daily lives. Living among people who are healthy and
compassionate will help nourish our ideals, our wholesome
volition, and our beautiful beginner’s mind—our ability to see
things without preconceived notions.
Nourish Yourself Mindfully with Four Nutriments Every Day
If you nourish yourself with four wholesome nutriments, consuming
a healthy diet of edible food and drinks, sensory impressions,
intention, and mental formations for your consciousness, then you,
along with your loved ones, will bene t in concrete ways that are
noticeable in your daily life. The Buddha said, “Nothing can survive
without food.” This is a very simple and very deep truth. Love and
hate are both living phenomena. If we do not nourish our love, it
will die and may turn into hate. If we want love to last, we have to
nurture it and give it food every day. Hate is the same; if we don’t


feed it, it cannot survive.
  Nourishing your body and mind with wholesome nutriments will
help you achieve peace and happiness and bring you further along
the path of healthy weight. And it is important to realize that the
mind and body are not separate. To achieve our goal of a healthier
weight, we need to consume all of the four nutriments mindfully.
We cannot just focus on one aspect of our being as if it is an entity
separate from the rest. We need to address all aspects
simultaneously, as a whole. Your previous weight loss e orts may
have failed because of the lack of this holistic approach. You now
know the essential elements needed to help you establish healthy,
wholesome habits for life. This is a worthwhile journey to embark
on. It will lead you in the direction of emancipation from all
su ering and a ictions—to the heart of the issue and the
underlying root of your unhealthy weight. When practiced
consistently, each step of this mindful journey can astonish you,
bringing you greater realization of confidence, joy, and peace.




CHAPTER 4
Stop and Look: The Present Moment
TO UNDERSTAND AND TRANSFORM our suffering, we need to use
a step-by-step process of deep observation—just like the scientist
does in the laboratory. We start by being aware of and
acknowledging our su ering. Take, for example, our unhappiness
with our weight. We must make an e ort to stop our busy lives for
a moment and become aware of our su ering—something most of
us try to avoid and resist. Instead, we need to embrace and accept
the pain we feel about our weight. Next, we must realize that the
su ering inside us isn’t just something we are looking at from the
outside: We are that block of su ering. We become one with our
su ering, just as the scienti c observer becomes one with the
objects of his investigation, and this amalgam is the key to
transforming and relieving our misery. For example, to understand
our shame of being overweight, we must acknowledge and accept
that we are embarrassed, angry, and lled with despair. By
becoming one with our su ering, we can feel it. We acknowledge
the feelings; we do not reject them or push them away. We know
that we can identify the causes of our su ering, and we can nd a
way out. How can we become deep observers of our su ering and
free ourselves from it? Through the daily practice of mindfulness.


So What Is Mindfulness?
In the previous chapters, we have brie y mentioned mindfulness.
Now we are going to o er a deeper, more comprehensive
understanding of mindfulness. The Chinese character for
“mindfulness” is “nian” ( ). It is a combination of two separate
characters, each with its own meaning. The top part of the character
( ) means “now,” and the bottom part of the character ( )
means “heart” or “mind.” Literally, the combined character means
the act of experiencing the present moment with your heart. So
mindfulness is the moment-to-moment awareness of what is
occurring in and around us. It helps us to be in touch with the
wonders of life, which are here and now. Our heart opens and is
immersed in the present moment, so that we can understand its true
nature. By being present and mindful of the present moment, we
can accept whatever is at that moment as it is, allowing change to
happen naturally, without struggle, without the usual resistance and
judgment that cause us to suffer more.
  Mindfulness is the energy that helps us look deeply at our body,
feelings, mind perceptions, and all that is around us. It is a source
of light in the darkness, allowing us to see clearly our life
experience in relation to everything else. It is through this kind of
insight that we can lift ourselves out of ignorance, the main cause of
suffering.
  Though many books have been written about the power of
mindfulness, it is something best learned by doing. Just like a
toddler learning to walk through repeated e ort—learning to crawl,
then standing up, falling countless times, and standing up again—
we must, if we want to get a good handle on mindfulness,
constantly apply it to everything we do, so that it becomes second
nature. Mindfulness does not happen by itself, however. You need
to have the desire to practice it.
  Mindfulness can help us understand ourselves in relation to all
that is within and around us. When we have di culty with our
weight problems, we often resent ourselves. We tend to look at our


eating habits and our distress as separate entities from ourselves,
and try to solve these problems from the outside. We need to
compassionately realize that these problems are not separate from
us: they are our own body, feelings, and mind, which are
interconnected with everything else in our world. This deep
understanding of the interdependence of all things enables us to
recognize what can be done to effect change in a steady manner.
   In the Discourse on the Four Foundations of Mindfulness, the
Buddha taught his disciples how to practice mindfulness to “help
living beings realize puri cation, overcome directly grief and
sorrow, end pain and anxiety, travel the right path, and realize
nirvana.” Although the Buddha was not speci cally addressing
weight management, the basic guidance is most relevant. The
insight it offers is as applicable now as it was then.
The Four Foundations of Mindfulness
There are four foundations of mindfulness. The rst is our own
body. When dealing with weight and eating problems, naturally, we
need to rst know our bodies and how to be in touch with and
appreciate them. The second foundation of mindfulness is feelings.
It teaches us how to be aware of our physiological, physical, and
psychological feelings in broad categories of pleasant, unpleasant,
mixed and neutral feelings. The third foundation is mental
formations—such as compassion, anger, or greed—the more
complex reactions that arise based on our feelings. This foundation
involves the practice of being aware of the mind’s activities. The
fourth foundation is the realm of objects of mind, because each
mental formation has an object. If there is no object there is no
subject, because consciousness is always consciousness of something.
The fourth foundation is the awareness of all things in us and
around us, the objects of our mental formations. Central to each
area of practice is the understanding that we are not separate from
the object of our mindfulness. As we watch our bodily sensations or
emotions, we are feeling them at the same time. Furthermore,


although each area of mindfulness focuses on a di erent object of
observation, all four areas are interconnected.
Mindfulness of the Body (Observation of the Body in the Body)
Mindfulness of the body is simply that: observing and becoming one
with our body and its condition. Being mindful of the body, we
practice observing and becoming fully aware of the breath, the
positions of the body, the actions of the body, and the various parts
of the body. We become aware of the state of the body, including
our aches, our pain, and our overweight. This is an important
practice because in our busy lives, we often ignore warning signals
from our body and postpone responding to its cries for help until it
is too late.
   The first important practice is the full awareness of breathing. Try
sitting in a chair comfortably, with your feet rmly touching the
  oor and your back straight. If you prefer, you can also lie down
  at and relax your body. Shift your attention to your in-breath and
out-breath. Say silently:
            When I breathe in, I know that I am breathing in.
            When I breathe out, I know that I am breathing out.
   This conscious breathing exercise is simple, yet its e ects are
profound when practiced regularly. To succeed, we must give all of
our attention to our breathing, and nothing else. As we follow our
in-breath, for example, we feel the air owing into our nostrils and
our lungs. When distracting thoughts arise, we let them go and
refocus on our in-breath and out-breath. Our mind stays focused on
our breathing for the entire length of each breath. As we breathe,
we become one with our breath. The body and the breath are not
separate entities. This is “mindfulness of the body in the body.”
   In everyday life, we often get lost in forgetfulness, operating on
autopilot for most of our waking hours. Our mind chases after
thousands of things, and we rarely take the time to come back to
ourselves, to be in touch with ourselves. We end up feeling


overwhelmed and alienated from ourselves. Conscious breathing is
a marvelous way to return to ourselves, like a child returning home
after a long journey. When we are still, we feel the calmness that
we have inside us, and we nd ourselves again. Conscious breathing
also allows us to be in contact with life in the present moment, the
only moment in which we can truly touch life.
   When we follow our breathing, we are already at ease, no longer
dominated by our anxieties, resentments, and longings. As we
breathe consciously, we become more stable with every moment.
   Take a moment to try this simple breathing exercise, and observe
how you feel afterward.
              When breathing in a long breath, silently say to yourself, “I am
                breathing in a long breath.” Then repeat the word “long” with
                each in-breath.
              When breathing out a long breath, silently say to yourself, “I am
                breathing out a long breath.” Then repeat “long” with each
                out-breath.
              Or if your breath is short, when breathing in, say, “I am
                breathing in a short breath.” Then repeat “short” with each in-
                breath.
              When breathing out a short breath, say, “I am breathing out a
                short breath.” Then repeat “short” with each out-breath.
   While the mind is following the breath, the mind is the breath
and only the breath. The two unite and in uence each other. In the
process of the practice, our breathing naturally becomes more
regular, harmonious, and calm, and our mind also becomes more
regular, harmonious, and calm. When the mind and the breathing
unite, feelings of joy, peace, and ease arise in the body.
           Breathing in, I am aware of my whole body.
           Breathing out, I am aware of my whole body.
   With this exercise, the distinction between body and mind


dissolves, and we experience the oneness of body and mind. The
object of our mindfulness here is no longer simply the breath but
the whole body itself as it is uni ed with the breath. In our daily
lives, our mind and our body do not often work in unison. Our
body may be here while our mind is somewhere else, perhaps
regretting the past or worrying about the future. And this disconnect
between mind and body is the crux of many weight problems. For
example, many people eat without feeling hunger or eat beyond
the point of fullness, either because the food looks good to them
and they crave it or because they are trying to soothe their di cult
emotions. Through mindfulness practice, we can nurture the
oneness of body and mind, and really listen to our body and know
what it needs to be truly nourished. We are able to restore our
wholeness and eat what our stomach wants, not what our craving
pushes us to eat.
   As body and mind become one, we need only calm our body in
order to calm our mind.
           Breathing in, I calm my body.
           Breathing out, I calm my body.
   The essence of mindfulness is to come back to dwell in the
present moment and observe what is happening. When body and
mind are one, the wounds in our hearts, minds, and bodies begin to
heal. Then we can truly begin to transform our weight issues.
   We have all had bad days when everything seems to go wrong.
After such a long day, we feel tired, discouraged, and down. We
might have an urge to have some comfort food—a pint of ice
cream, say, or some chocolate-chip cookies or a bag of chips. At
times like these, it is best simply to return to our body through
mindful breathing, cut o all external contact, and close the door of
the senses. Following our breathing, we can collect our mind, body,
and breath, and they will become one. We will feel warm and
soothed, like someone sitting indoors by the re while the wind
and rain are raging outside.


  This method can be practiced anywhere at any time—while
waiting in line, on the train, on the plane, and in our o ce. We can
practice the same breathing technique when we walk, sit, stand, eat,
drink, cook, or play. We can use our breathing in order to be aware
of the positions of our body: lying, sitting, standing, or walking. We
can say, “Breathing in, I calm my body,” in order to continue
dwelling in mindfulness and to calm our body and mind. We can
come back and make ourselves whole again whenever we want or
need to do so.
  Practicing breathing while reciting verses like the ones described
earlier in this chapter helps us dwell more easily in mindfulness.
Mindfulness makes every action of our body more serene, and we
become the master of our body and mind. Without mindfulness, our
actions can be hurried, imprudent, insensitive, and abrupt.
Mindfulness nurtures the power of concentration in us. As we
practice, we nd that our actions slow down. We will see our
everyday actions become harmonious, graceful, and measured.
Mindfulness becomes visible in our actions and speech. We are
more in the ow of life, and actually living it. When any action is
placed in the light of mindfulness, the body and mind become
relaxed, peaceful, and joyful.
  Going a little deeper, in a sitting or lying position, conscious
breathing can also help us to be in touch with the functioning of
our body. We observe all the parts of our body from the top of our
head to the bottom of our feet. In the process of our observation,
we visualize and get to know each part of our body, including the
brain, heart, lungs, liver, stomach, gallbladder, spleen, blood,
immune system, kidneys, bones, and so on. For example:
            Breathing in, I am aware of my liver.
             Breathing out, I know that my liver is working hard day in and
               day out to support me.
  Because of excess weight, some people may have very negative
feelings about their bodies. But if they stop and re ect, they can
appreciate their eyes, feet, and hands, which are still functioning


well even though other parts such as their joints and heart need
more tender loving care. Many of us have lost touch with our body.
Our body may have been calling out for help, but we are so
preoccupied with our life’s demands that we ignore our body’s SOS
signals. For years and years, our eyes, feet, heart, lungs, and other
body parts have devotedly and faithfully worked for us nonstop. If
our body is not happy and is in turmoil, we cannot be happy. Yet
we rarely give the parts of our body much attention or express our
gratitude to them. We cannot take our body for granted. Observing
our body mindfully o ers us a chance to thank our body for its hard
work, enabling us to do so much in our lives, manifesting our life’s
work. Our body needs our appreciation and caring. The regular
practice of total relaxation (see appendix C), in which we lie down
and consecutively relax each part of our body, is very important for
our well-being. Make a habit of practicing it regularly, starting with
once a week and increasing the frequency as you experience its
benefits.
   Mindfully observing the di erent parts of the body can open the
door to healing. At rst we recognize the presence of the body part
being observed, and then we embrace it lovingly. We see that each
organ is dependent on the function of all other organs and that
every muscle and cell in our body is supporting these organs.
   Another exercise proposed by the Buddha in his teachings on
mindfulness of the body is to see the four elements in the body:
earth, water, re, and air. You may like to see a cloud in your body,
because without clouds there can be no rain, nor water to drink or
grains and vegetables to eat. We see earth in us, earth as the
minerals in our body. We also see the earth is in us because, thanks
to Mother Earth, we have food to eat. We see air in us, because
without air we could not survive, just like every other species on
earth. The re in us is the warmth made by the burning of energy
from food, and it is a re ection of the sun, the re element outside
us. Everything is interconnected. Our body and our universe are
one.
   This concept, what we call “interbeing,” applies to everything.


Look into your body. Your body cannot exist alone, by itself. It has
to “inter-be” with the earth, the air, the rain, the plants, your
parents, and your ancestors. There is nothing in the universe that is
not present in your body. When you touch your body deeply, you
touch the whole universe.
   One of the more di cult mindfulness exercises o ered by the
Buddha to help us be mindful of the body in the body is to observe
our body in the di erent stages of disintegration after we die.
Although it may be unpleasant to visualize death, and the process
by which our physical body reduces to dust, the e ect of this
practice can be very transforming. The intention is not to make us
weary of life but to provide insight into how precious life is. Many
of us tend to think we will live forever, or at least that death can be
put o for a long time. Many survivors of cancer, heart attack, or
natural disasters such as tsunamis and earthquakes have a very
di erent perspective on life after those traumatic experiences.
Having been close to losing their lives, many of them nd
themselves appreciating life much more. They savor each moment
and become more appreciative of the many things that they
previously took for granted. But we do not have to experience this
kind of trauma to see the impermanent nature of life or enjoy it
fully.
             Breathing in, I am aware of the impermanent nature of my body.
          Breathing out, I smile to my body and enjoy being alive.
   Contemplating just the body alone can already lead us to
enlightenment, because the body contains the other three
foundations of mindfulness as well as the whole cosmos. When we
see all the conditions that come together to make the body
manifest, we don’t underestimate it or take it lightly. Contemplating
the body is the same as contemplating the Buddha.
   Sometimes we despise our body and criticize it, but even the
negative things in our body are wonders. Just as with a lotus pond,
we tend to accept the lotus but not the mud in the pond. The lotus
is precious, but so is the mud, because without the mud there


would be no lotus. We must treasure everything that belongs to the
body and not despise it. It is our very vehicle for awakening. We
can nd all aspects of the path to enlightenment in our own body.
We can’t nd enlightenment or nirvana outside our body; it can be
found only in our body.
   To be in touch with all the di erent aspects of the body is a main
goal of the meditative, mindful observation of the body. We cannot
function well without a healthy body. With the mindfulness
exercises given here, we can maintain health in our body, mind,
and spirit. By doing so, we free ourselves from su ering, leading to
joy and happiness. When we nourish our body with joy and
happiness, we can heal the wounds within us—the wounds that
often prevent us from following a lifestyle that allows us to reach
our healthy weight.
Mindfulness of the Feelings (Observation of Feelings in the Feelings)
Many of us approach weight loss with the desire to change only
what we do not like about ourselves. But taking time to increase
our joy and the wholesome qualities in us can also help us in
reaching a healthy weight. It is very important to be aware of not
only what is not going well in us, but also what is going well. In
every moment, there are many things that we can appreciate and
enjoy, things that nourish our happiness. There are the blue sky, the
white clouds, the sunshine, the solid earth beneath our feet. There
are the birds singing, the trees, the presence of our loved ones, the
fact that we still have food to eat, and the fact that we are still alive.
Life is a miracle, and being aware of simply this can already make
us very happy.
   It is a very helpful practice to write down all our current
conditions for happiness. We can list all the many things we have
that we are grateful for and that we usually take for granted. When
you brush your teeth, you can be happy that you still have teeth to
brush! When you go to the toilet, you can be happy that you can
still urinate and defecate on your own; you haven’t lost control of
your eliminating functions. You still have the use of your eyes, ears,


body, and mind. When we stop to think about all these things, our
list can become quite long! Observation of the feelings involves
consciously bringing up our positive feelings. In the Buddha’s Full
Awareness of Breathing teaching, the first thing he proposes when it
comes to awareness of the feelings is to nourish our joy and
happiness. In order to have the strength and energy to embrace
painful feelings, we must nourish our positive feelings regularly.
This same practice appears in modern medicine. Before performing
surgery, doctors assess whether the patient is strong enough to
undergo the procedure. If not, they help the person become
stronger before they operate.
   Weight is, for many people, an emotional issue. Some people eat
in response to emotions—happiness, sadness, anxiety, even
boredom. For others, excess weight may cause them emotional
strain due to the stigma and prejudice they face because of their
size and appearance. Mindfulness can help us cope with these
emotions and feelings.
   In Buddhism, there are four sorts of feelings—pleasant,
unpleasant, mixed, and neutral. Mixed feelings are both pleasant
and unpleasant at the same time. Neutral feelings are neither
pleasant nor unpleasant. All four are important, and none should
be brushed away. When we come across an unpleasant feeling, we
should not bury it at the back of our mind. Instead, we need to
breathe consciously and observe it.
              Breathing in, I know that this unpleasant feeling has arisen
                within me.
              Breathing out, I know that this unpleasant feeling is present in
                me.
   Whenever there is a pleasant, unpleasant, mixed, or neutral
feeling, we need to practice mindful observation of that feeling. We
need to acknowledge it and know that there is no separation
between us and our feeling. We are neither drowned in nor
annoyed by the feeling, nor do we reject it. This is the most
e ective way to be in contact with feelings. Our attitude of not


clinging to or rejecting our feelings helps us avoid intensifying the
feeling, and we begin our path of transformation.
   Our feelings usually play an important role in directing our
thoughts and our mind. When we are mindful of our feelings, the
situation begins to change. We are our feelings, but we are also
more than just our feelings. When mindfulness arises, there is an
energy that can embrace our feeling, and then the feeling is no
longer the only thing present in us and can be transformed under
the light of our awareness. With mindfulness, we will no longer be
swept away by the river of our feelings. When you feel anxious,
instead of reaching into the freezer for an ice-cream bar, pause and
consciously take a few in-breaths and out-breaths, embracing your
feeling with your breathing.
           Breathing in, I am feeling anxious.
           Breathing out, I cuddle my anxiety.
   When we accept our anxiety with compassion, we are more able
to see the nature of our anxiety and more capable of transcending
it. We will not be led astray by our anxiety and our habit energy of
eating an ice-cream bar when we are anxious. Our mindfulness
energy leads us to understand our feeling and give ourselves what
we truly need to calm our anxiety.
   All our feelings have a physiological or psychological root. For
example, if you have an unpleasant feeling of irritability because
you overate and now have indigestion, your unpleasant feeling has
a physiological root. If you have an unpleasant feeling of frustration
because you cannot t into the jeans that you bought last year, your
unpleasant feeling has a psychological root. To be able to identify
the roots of your feelings is to look deeply in order to see how and
why your irritability or frustration arose and to understand its true
nature. What past experiences caused you to feel vulnerable and
irritated easily? To know a feeling is not just to see its roots, but
also to see its owering and its fruits, and what it has grown into.
Looking deeply, you realize that the reason you cannot t into
those jeans is that you stopped exercising because your new job is


so demanding that you do not have time to exercise. Further, you
recall that you always felt better and handled stress more aptly with
regular exercise.
   When a ictions such as anger, confusion, jealousy, and anxiety
arise in us, they generally disturb our body and mind. We lose our
peace, joy, and calm, and many of us turn to food, the TV, or the
Internet for relief. Yet to truly regain our peace, joy, and calm, we
must again practice breathing mindfully.
           Breathing in, I know I have an unpleasant feeling.
           Breathing out, I am here for this unpleasant feeling.
           Breathing in, I calm the feeling in me.
           Breathing out, I calm the feeling in me.
   We have to face our unpleasant feelings with care, a ection, and
nonviolence. We should learn to treat our unpleasant feelings as
friends who can teach us a great deal. Just like a mindfulness bell,
unpleasant feelings draw our attention to issues and situations in
our lives that are not working and that need our care. Proceeding
with mindful observation, we will gain insight and understanding
into what needs to be changed and how to change it.
   With this practice, our breathing becomes lighter and calmer. As
a result, our mind and body will slowly become light, calm, and
clear as well. Every time we see the substance, roots, and e ects of
our feelings, we are no longer under the control of them. The
whole character of our feelings can be changed just by the presence
of mindfulness energy.
   We must also practice embracing our neutral feelings. If left
unattended, neutral feelings may slowly turn into unpleasant
feelings. However, if we know how to manage them and if we hold
them in mindfulness, they can become pleasant feelings. For
example, after gaining weight, you may have had the unpleasant
feeling of having blood-sugar levels higher than normal, a step on
the path toward diabetes. If you lose some weight, your blood sugar
may return to normal, and you will feel very happy. As time goes


by you may no longer feel the intensity of the pleasant feeling
associated with normal blood sugar, and it may drift into a neutral
feeling as you take it for granted. However, when we are mindfully
aware, our normal blood sugar can be a source of pleasant feelings
again.
Mindfulness of the Mind (Observation of Mind in the Mind)
The mind is a powerful entity. It can help us achieve things we
once thought were impossible. It can also, if we allow it, hinder us
in reaching our goals. When it comes to our weight problem, the
mind can interfere with our success.
   As discussed in the previous chapter, the contents of the mind are
the psychological phenomena called mental formations or mental
states, which are the manifestation of seeds from our store
consciousness.
   There are positive and wholesome mental formations, like
mindfulness, compassion, and nonviolence. And there are
unwholesome mental formations, like anger, hatred, and confusion.
There are also mental formations that can be wholesome or
unwholesome depending on the circumstances, like regret, which is
bene cial when it wakes us up and helps us not repeat our
mistakes, but unbene cial when it is prolonged and paralyzing.
Every time a mental formation manifests itself, you should be able
to recognize it and call it by its true name. Just like when you
identify herbs for cooking by their smell and appearance.
   How we feel, perceive, and act depends on how our mind reacts
to and interprets the interactions between the sense organs and the
sense objects. For example, as you drive into work on a sunny
morning, your mind may bounce from one thought to another: “My
neck hurts and I feel uncomfortable [restlessness]. … The sun is
warm and bright [joy]. … I am late for my meeting [anxiety]….
Why did that car cut me off [anger]?!”
   The restlessness, joy, anxiety, and anger described here are
examples of mental formations that arise from seeds that are buried


in the deepest level of our mind, the store consciousness. Our store
consciousness is like a eld in which every kind of seed is sown—
seeds of compassion, joy, hope, and mindfulness as well as seeds of
sorrow, fear, and despair. Every day our thoughts, words, and deeds
reinforce certain seeds in the store consciousness. When these seeds
germinate, what they generate becomes the substance of our life.
Our body, our mind, and our world are all manifestations of the
seeds that we have chosen to water in store consciousness.
  Any seed that has an opportunity to manifest at the level of mind
consciousness becomes stronger. For example, if we get into an
argument, the seed of anger will manifest itself in the mind as the
energy of anger. If we do not take care of this energy of anger and
learn how to tame it with mindfulness, when our anger calms down
and returns to the store consciousness in the form of a seed, this
seed will become stronger and will arise more easily and intensely
the next time we encounter a frustrating situation. As with
everything, all the seeds are interdependent. The manifestation of
any one seed will in uence all the other seeds. Mindfulness is
actually one of these seeds, and if we water it often, it will also
become stronger. This is why we want to continuously cultivate our
seed of mindfulness—so that it gets stronger all the time and is able
to shine light on all that we experience.
  Taking time to observe the mind can help you become aware of
mental formations that prevent you from reaching a healthy weight,
and turn them into positive mental formations. The process is the
same as observing the body and the feelings. We mindfully observe
the arising, presence, and disappearance of the mental formations.
We recognize them and look deeply into them in order to see their
substance, their roots in the past, and their possible fruits in the
future, using conscious breathing while we observe them. When we
take the time to do this—to fully expose the mental formations to
mindfulness—they naturally transform in a wholesome direction.
  For example, desire means to be caught in unwholesome longing.
In relation to issues with weight, the longing can be for too much
food or for watching unhealthy amounts of television. Whenever


our mind and thoughts turn to such desires, we rst need to
acknowledge them: “My mind wants me to eat more than I should.”
“My mind wants me to sit and watch TV rather than go for a walk.”
Acknowledge their existence instead of ghting, resisting, or
suppressing them. By doing so, the desires will lose their strength
and grip on you.
   When such unhealthy desires are not present, we also need to
observe that. We can practice like this: “At this time, the mind that
wants to eat too much is not arising.” Desirelessness, the absence of
longing for something, is one of the wholesome mental formations.
It gives rise to feelings of joy, freedom, peace, and ease. It is the
basis of true happiness, because in true happiness there must be the
element of peace, joy, and ease.
Handling Our Anger
It is very important to learn to observe our negative emotions. One
common negative emotion is anger—a complex formation that is at
the heart of so many people’s struggles with weight, relationships,
and life in general. Identifying the presence and the absence of
anger in us brings many bene ts. Anger is like a ame blazing up
and consuming our self-control, making us think, say, and do things
that we will probably regret later. For example, when we get angry
about our spouse’s control over what we can eat and what we
cannot eat, we may say nasty things to our spouse. Later, we regret
saying things that hurt our spouse. When we observe that anger is
present and we mindfully identify our anger, it will lose its
destructive nature. Only when we are angry and not observing our
anger mindfully does our anger become destructive. When anger is
born in us, we should follow our breathing closely while we
identify and mindfully observe our anger. When we do that,
mindfulness has already been born in us, and anger can no longer
monopolize our consciousness. Awareness stands alongside the
anger: “Breathing in, I know that I am angry.” This awareness is a
companion for the anger. Our mindful observation is not to
suppress or drive out our anger, but just to look after it. This is a


very important principle. Mindful observation is like a lamp that
gives light. It is not a judge. It throws light on our anger and looks
after it in an a ectionate and caring way without judgment, like an
older sister looking after and comforting her younger sibling.
   When we are angry, our anger is our very self. To suppress or
chase away our anger is to suppress or chase away ourselves. When
anger is born, we can be aware that anger is an energy in us, and
we can change that energy into another kind of energy. If we want
to transform it, first we have to know how to accept it.
   We can also turn our anger into something wholesome, just as we
create nourishing compost for our gardens from our food scraps. If
we know how to accept our anger, to stop resisting or ghting it,
we can start to feel a glimpse of peace and joy. Gradually, we can
transform anger completely into the energy of understanding and
compassion, allowing us to love, take care of, and honor ourselves
better.
   As we follow our breathing and hold our anger with mindfulness,
the situation becomes less and less contentious. Although the anger
is still there, it gradually loses it strength because we begin to
understand it and to understand better the su ering of the person
who triggered our anger. With this understanding, we can forgive
and let go. We can accept our anger and make peace with it.
   Looking into our anger, we can see its roots, such as the
misunderstanding of ourselves and others, our pain, the violence
and unkindness in our society, and hidden resentment over many
generations. These roots can be present both within us and in the
person who played the principal role in triggering our anger. When
anger arises, we rst need to come back to our conscious breathing
and care for our anger with mindfulness. We concentrate on our
breathing in order to maintain mindfulness.
            Breathing in, I know that I am angry.
            Breathing out, I know that I must take care of my anger.
            Breathing in, I know that anger is still here.
               Breathing out, I know that anger is in me and I know that


                  mindfulness is in me also.
              Breathing in, I know that anger is an unpleasant feeling.
                Breathing out, I know that this feeling has been born and will
                  die.
              Breathing in, I know that I can take care of my anger. Breathing
            out, I calm my anger.
              —adapted from Transformation and Healing by Thich Nhat Hanh1
   Mindfulness embraces the feeling, as a mother holds her crying
child in her arms and transmits all her a ection and care. If a
mother puts all her heart and mind into caring for the baby, the
baby will feel the mother’s gentleness and will calm down. In the
same way, we can calm the functioning of our mind. In order to
realize the state of non-anger in our conscious and subconscious
mind, we have to practice meditating on love and compassion.
Anger foments many of the issues we have with weight; love and
compassion for others and ourselves help us better address these
issues.
   Loving-kindness meditation helps us develop the mind of love
and compassion and is a good antidote for our anger. Loving-
kindness is the ability to bring peace and happiness to ourselves
and others. Compassion is the capacity to remove the su ering in us
and others. The core of love and compassion is understanding—the
ability to recognize the su ering in ourselves and others. We have
to be in touch with the physical and psychological su ering in
ourselves and others. When we are deeply in contact with it,
grounded rmly in mindfulness, a feeling of compassion is born in
us immediately. Because understanding is the very foundation of
love and compassion, our words and actions will then become ones
that reduce the su ering in ourselves and others, dissolve our
resentment, and bring more happiness to us and to others at the
same time.
Love Meditation


We begin practicing the love meditation below by focusing on
ourselves: “I.” Until we are able to love and take care of ourselves,
we cannot be of much help to others. Next, we can o er the
practice for others (substituting “he/she” or “they”), starting with
someone we love; next, someone we like; then, someone neutral to
us; and finally, someone who has made us suffer.
            May I be peaceful, happy, and light in body and spirit.
            May I be safe and free from injury.
            May I be free from anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety.
                May I learn to look at myself with the eyes of understanding and
                  love.
            May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and
            happiness in myself.
            May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving, and
            delusion in myself.
            May I know how to nourish the seeds of joy in myself every day.
            May I be able to live fresh, solid, and free.
            May I be free from attachment and aversion, but not be indifferent.
                                           —Thich Nhat Hanh, Teachings on Love
   If we know how to acknowledge and recognize the presence of
every mental formation, embrace it, calm it, and look deeply into
it, we will gain insight. When we practice observing the mind, we
can better understand why it is we feel and act the way we do. Why
do we make poor health decisions? Why do we surround ourselves
with people who may not be good for us? Closely observing the
interrelationship of all that is in and around us helps guide us on
the path to understanding and overcoming our issues with our
weight.
Mindfulness of the Objects of Mind (Observation of Objects of Mind in the Objects of
Mind)
Observation of the objects of mind includes all that can be


perceived of as existing in forms, feelings, and thoughts, as well as
all phenomena. When we speak of “mindfulness,” we must specify:
Mindfulness of what? Mindfulness of breathing? Mindfulness of
walking? Mindfulness of anger? You have to be mindful of
something. If that something is not there, there is no mindfulness
possible. So when we speak of observing the mind in the mind, we
are speaking of the subject of cognition, the subject of our mental
formations, the subject of mindfulness, of hate, of love, or of
jealousy. And with every subject there must be an object. To love
means to love what? To love whom? To hate means to hate what?
To hate whom? These are what is meant by the objects of mind.
   Observing the objects of mind means to see that no phenomena
has an independent existence, but arises because of the numerous
conditions that have brought it to be. As the Buddha said, “This is,
because that is.” When we look deeply into the objects of mind, we
see their arising, their duration, and their fading away. But because
we see they are interrelated with everything else and have no
separate self, we also see that they have no birth and no death.
They were already there in the conditions that created them before
they were born and they continue to exist in these conditions after
they fade away. When we see the source and true nature of the
objects of mind that we are contemplating, they no longer bind us.
Untying Our Internal Knots
In teaching on the observation of the objects of mind, the Buddha
emphasized awareness of our internal formations, mental knots or
fetters, born from our habit energies and misperceptions of reality.
When we immerse ourselves in a certain environment, live with a
certain group of people, or expose ourselves to certain media, we
tend to develop certain behaviors or habits. Our parents and our
society heavily in uence how we think, feel, and behave. Our habit
energies result from the way we have learned to respond to sensory
perceptions. These habit energies leave indelible imprints in our
mind, and they form internal knots that reside deep in our
consciousness. These knots are the blocks of sadness and pain that


are tied up deeply in our consciousness. When your mother keeps
reminding you that you are fat, that you should not eat this or that,
you gradually build up resentment and guilt, forming complex
knots of suffering.
   When negative habit energies rise up in our mind, they tend to
dominate us and limit our horizon so that we cannot see things
clearly as they are. Habit energies such as smoking, drinking a lot,
and overeating bring us su ering, while habit energies such as
humor and generosity bring us joy.
   We can easily get attached to our desires—like an insatiable
craving for chips—and use them to cope with our emotional
hunger. If we are not able to satisfy our craving, knots of desire may
form in our mind. Not only the desire for food but also the desire
for alcohol, cigarettes, drugs, sex, and praise can lead to the
formation of knots in our mind. Once we have experienced one of
these pleasant feelings—from getting tipsy, high, and so on—a knot
is tied, and we are tempted to seek the same experience again and
again. Because of our attachment, we often end up with unpleasant
feelings when our cravings are not met, and this causes other knots
of suffering to form in our consciousness.
   When internal knots of desire, anger, fear, sorrow, and low self-
esteem have been buried and repressed in our mind for months,
years, or decades, they greatly affect our mental and physical health.
The suppression may be the result of wrong perceptions or pressure
from societal norms. Because it is easier to avoid su ering in the
short term, we have defense mechanisms that push our
psychological pains, sorrows, and internal con icts into our
subconscious mind and bury them there. But occasionally they
emerge and surface in our thoughts, speech, and actions, re ecting
symptoms of physical and psychological disturbance.
   If we allow knots to form and then let them grow strong, they
will eventually overwhelm us, and it will be very di cult to untie
them. It is important that we practice mindful observation and are
aware as soon as knots form in us so we can nd a way to
transform them before they become big and very tightly bound.


   The way to transform these a ictions is to look deeply into
them. In order to observe them, we need to bring them into
awareness through the practice of conscious breathing so that we
can recognize our feelings, thoughts, words, and actions as they
arise from the depths of our mind.
   When we enter a mindful state through conscious breathing, we
are essentially closing the doors of our senses. During this time,
deeply buried internal knots will have the opportunity to emerge
and reveal themselves in the form of images or feelings in our
mind. When they surface, we may not be able to understand or see
the cause of these unpleasant emotions. But if we shine the light of
mindfulness on them, we may see them more clearly. Sometimes
the feelings are too intense and unpleasant, and we want to bury
them again. But when we are able to maintain and increase the
energy of mindfulness, we can overcome our aversion to our
painful emotions. We continue to nourish mindfulness through
conscious breathing and try to acknowledge our internal knots and
con icts as they emerge. We learn to receive them with the love
and tenderness of a mother embracing her baby. We can say: “The
light of mindfulness is here and shining, and I know that I have
enough strength to be in touch with the knots that are emerging.”
   It may also be that we need the help of others trained in the
practice of mindfulness and capable of dwelling in the present
moment to support us in staying with our painful feelings. We can
ask a friend to sit next to us and breathe deeply with us as we
embrace the feeling together. The collective energy of mindfulness
and compassion at a retreat or practice center is also very powerful.
Many people are able to transform very deep su ering and release
very tightly bound and long-standing internal knots with the help of
a loving, supportive spiritual community.
   Some years ago Thay (thay means “teacher” in Vietnamese, and
students often address Thich Nhat Hanh as “Thay”) o ered a retreat
for Vietnam veterans. Many of them carried secrets and tremendous
su ering that they had never been able to share with others or nd
relief from. We would sit in a circle, just listening, and allow each


veteran to speak out his su ering. With some of them, we just sat
silently for a long time before they were able to open their heart
and share with us. One veteran told us that during the war one day
his unit attacked guerrilla ghters. They defeated them and brought
back the wounded Vietcong to their camp as war prisoners. In his
helicopter he transported a woman ghter who was seriously
wounded. She was clutching her hammock. Guerrilla ghters living
in the jungle slept in hammocks and carried their few possessions
with them. She continued to stare at him with great hatred and
anger. In her anguished look, he felt she was accusing him: “Why
have you come here to destroy my country?” Before they could
reach their base, she died in the helicopter, her eyes still staring at
him, cold and hard. He had kept her hammock with him all those
years and brought it with him to the retreat.
   In the retreat we o ered teachings on embracing our su ering
and holding tenderly our painful emotions. We all trained in
mindful walking and breathing, developing our concentration and
calm. The veteran began to see that although he had committed
terrible acts during the war, he could do very positive and healing
things now to heal the wounds he caused in the past. On the last
day of retreat we organized a bon re to help the veterans release
their su ering from the war. We practiced walking meditation to
the bon re and encouraged each veteran to throw into the re
objects or symbols that represented his or her pain. The man stood
a long time by the re, clutching his hammock tightly to his chest.
He refused to throw it into the fire.
   One of the nuns told the man, “Throw the hammock into the
  re.” But he resisted. He was attached to his su ering, to his
complex. Thay went to him and very gently encouraged him to
release it. Thay told him, “Now you have become a new person and
compassion is born in you. Don’t continue to hold on to your old
su ering, to your guilt. Give me the hammock.” And nally he gave
it to Thay. Then the nun and Thay put the hammock into the
  ames. And there was a big transformation in our friend. He felt so
much better: he was light and free from the weight, the complex of


guilt that he had carried with him and been attached to for so many
years.
   By just observing and acknowledging our feelings and our
thoughts without judgment, blame, or criticism, we have embarked
on the path of emancipation from our su ering. If there is pain,
sorrow, or anger, we simply acknowledge that we feel the pain, the
sorrow, and the anger. When we acknowledge these feelings with
mindfulness, we do not let the feelings of pain, sorrow, or anger
take us over and lead us astray. Instead we try to calm them down
with tenderness. Practicing like this will cause our knots to loosen
up, and repeated practice will eventually help us understand their
roots by identifying the sources of nutriments that have brought
them into being. With this insight and understanding, we can stop
the suffering at its roots.
   The practice is not a matter of transforming our intellect alone.
Day and night we have to water the seed of understanding in our
store consciousness so that it will grow and help us see the nature
of interbeing in everything we see and touch, allowing us to make
peace with ourselves. We have to bring this understanding into our
daily life so that, with mindfulness, we are more aware of our
feelings, recognize them, and prevent them from becoming knots in
the first place.
   We often confront feelings of regret and fear. We have all had
regrets and wished that we had not done a certain thing in the past.
If we keep looking back remorsefully, we may create guilt
complexes, which prevent us from being happy. We may believe
that mistakes have been made already and that we cannot go back
to the past to change things. When we look deeply into the relative
nature of time, we see that the past has created the present. If we
seize the present moment with mindfulness, we are in touch with
the past. We can actually go back to the past, while staying rmly
rooted in the present moment, and heal the past. We forgive
ourselves for our mistakes, knowing we didn’t have enough wisdom
or the right conditions at that time to do better. We transform our
regrets in the present into compassion and understanding, and in


this way we also transform the past.
   Moreover, since we are the continuation of our ancestors, and we
are inextricably linked to them as well as to our parents and our
siblings, if we can transform ourselves, we can also help transform
them and bring peace and joy to those we love. By taking hold of
the present, we can free ourselves from su ering and heal the
trauma or wrongdoings that happened in the past.
   For example, a mother who has been using fast foods, sodas, and
sweets to reward her children’s good behavior may feel guilty about
her children when they become obese young adults. If the mother
lives mindfully, she will see that there are still many opportunities
available to help her children master their weight. Furthermore, she
can help many other children avoid falling into these unhealthy
behavior traps. She can volunteer in schools and participate in their
wellness councils, working alongside principals and teachers to
ensure that children get healthier food choices at school. In this
way, the mother can ease her remorse and feel good that she is
contributing to the health and well-being of many other children.
   Besides transforming our negative seeds and unpleasant feelings,
let us not forget or undermine the strength and wonders of our
positive seeds. We have wholesome and unwholesome seeds.
However, we need to recognize that each seed is dependent on all
the others for its existence. This interdependent nature means that
an unwholesome seed contains elements of wholesome seeds and
vice versa. We can transform the unwholesome seed simply by
watering the wholesome ones. So when we come across di cult
times in our lives, if we touch and water the seeds of peace and joy
that are already in us, they will sprout and bring the fruits of peace
and happiness. Their strong presence will overcome and weaken
the unwholesome seeds. Therefore, it is equally important that we
regularly observe objects of mind that can lead us to well-being and
shine the light of mindfulness on wholesome seeds so that they can
grow stronger in the field of our mind.


Practicing Mindfulness in the Twenty-First Century
By practicing these four foundations of mindfulness, we will be able
to nourish and protect ourselves, free ourselves from pain, and gain
wisdom. Through these practices we penetrate the interrelationship
of our physical, physiological, and psychological experience.
Furthermore, we can see that each of us and the rest of the world
are interdependent—that we as observers, and the world that we
perceive, are not separate in time and space. Seeing the true,
interconnected nature of our body, feelings, mind, and objects of
mind lays the foundation for well-being and happiness.
   Generating the energy of mindfulness is essential for
transformation. We can live each moment of our life mindfully. We
look, listen, think, speak, and act with our mindfulness. When we
cook, we cook mindfully. When we eat, we eat mindfully. When we
exercise, we move our bodies mindfully. Being aware of our
breathing can instantly connect us to what we are doing. By
enjoying our breathing in whatever we are doing, we produce the
energy of mindfulness to help us touch and live life deeply. This
practice allows us to transform the garbage of our a ictions into
flowers of well-being.
   Every one of us can become a Buddha. A Buddha is someone who
is fully awake. Prince Siddhartha Gautama was a human being who
became a full-time Buddha after years of concentrated practice. We
can all touch Buddhahood as part-time Buddhas when we embark
on the path of mindfulness training and the road to attaining
healthy weight. Bear in mind that as we practice, we should not
view the teachings of Buddhism as rigid dogmas demanding blind
commitment. They are simply instruments for gaining insight,
which help us remove the obstacles to correct perception.
   Being mindful does not mean that we just sit for hours on our
meditation cushion in a retreat or monastery. There are many ways
to practice mindfulness that can be fully integrated into our daily
living. Besides conscious breathing, we can do walking meditation,
sitting meditation, smiling, mindful listening, mindful speaking, and
mindful working. We can practice concentration and looking


deeply in all the activities of our daily life. Even while walking, we
can practice stopping. We can walk in such a way that we arrive
with each step—not walking just to get somewhere else. We can
walk to enjoy each step. If we practice stopping while attending to
e-mails, sur ng the Web, attending meetings or appointments,
folding the laundry, washing the dishes, or taking a shower, we are
living deeply. If we do not practice this way, the days and months
will y by without our awareness, and we will lose many precious
moments of our life. Stopping helps us live fully in the present. We
have many daily opportunities to help our seeds of joy and
happiness flourish.
IN CHAPTERS 5, 6, AND 7, we will share more everyday
mindfulness practices that you can use throughout your daily life
and integrate into almost every task you undertake. Every act and
every moment of our life is a valuable opportunity to practice
mindfulness.
   As we deepen our practice of mindfulness, one breath at a time,
one step at a time, we will discover its many wonders. It helps us
make real contact with life, making it more meaningful. When we
are present, life is also present. Mindfulness practice improves our
ability to concentrate. When we can concentrate, we understand and
look more deeply into whatever arises. Deep looking ultimately
leads to insight and understanding, helping to liberate us from our
fear, despair, and su ering and to touch real joy and peace. With
mindfulness, we can touch and embrace our life more deeply. We
can savor the many gifts that life o ers us every day, allowing us to
receive nourishment and healing for ourselves and our beloved
ones.




PART 2
Mindful Action Plans




CHAPTER 5
Mindful Eating
WE HAVE JUST LEARNED that conscious breathing is an essential
practice for bringing our body and mind together, nurturing the
well-being of the body and mind, and fostering our connection to
all things. And just as mindfully breathing air sustains our physical
and spiritual life, so, too, does eating food. Not only does food
provide the nutrients and energy we need to support our physical
bodies; mindful eating can also help us touch the interdependent
nature of all things—and can help us end our difficulty with weight.
   Looking deeply at the food we eat, we see that it contains the
earth, the air, the rain, the sunshine, and the hard work of farmers
and all those who process, transport, and sell us the food. When we
eat with full awareness, we become increasingly mindful of all the
elements and e ort needed to make our meals a reality, and this in
turn fosters our appreciation of the constant support we get from
others and from nature. Whenever we eat or drink, we can engage
all our senses in the eating and drinking experience. Eating and
drinking like this, we not only feed our bodies and safeguard our
physical health but also nurture our feelings, our mind, and our
consciousness. And we can do this numerous times throughout the
day. Mindful eating begins with our choice of what to eat and
drink. We want to choose foods and drinks that are good for our
health and good for the planet, in the modest portions that will
help us control our weight. Yet there are so many types of foods


and drinks, and so much information about nutrition and so many
diet plans, that we can nd it quite di cult to make the right
choices. A good way to overcome this challenge is to get up to
speed on the latest science-based advice.
The Basics of Eating Well: What Nutrients Are in Our Food?
Food gives the body the raw materials it needs to run the metabolic
processes of life. All foods contain at least one, and often two or
three, of the so-called macronutrients—carbohydrates, proteins, and
fats. These macronutrients give us energy to fuel our daily activities.
They also perform unique roles throughout the body. Carbohydrates
provide the fastest form of energy, usable by every cell. Proteins
provide the building blocks for all of our tissues and organs—skin
and muscle, bone and blood, liver and heart. They also form
countless cellular mechanisms and minute messengers, such as the
enzymes that digest our food and the neurotransmitters that send
signals from the brain throughout the body. Fats get woven into the
membrane of every cell, insulate nerves, and serve as a precursor to
life-sustaining hormones. Food also provides us with vitamins and
minerals, the so-called micronutrients—literally, nutrients that are
essential in tiny amounts—used to build tissues and catalyze
chemical reactions throughout the body.
   Nutrition science of the early twentieth century focused on
understanding what macronutrients and micronutrients we need to
p revent diseases of de ciency, such as protein-de ciency
kwashiorkor and vitamin D-de ciency rickets. Starting in the mid-
twentieth century, nutrition science shifted its focus to complex
chronic diseases such as diabetes, heart disease, and cancer—
illnesses that develop imperceptibly over time, have no easy cure,
and end lives prematurely. Thanks to many advances in science, we
now know quite a bit about what to eat and drink—and what not
to eat and drink—to prevent these chronic diseases. But you do not
need to be a scientist to eat well. Nutrients, after all, are found in
foods. And you need only follow a few fundamental food guidelines


to maintain your health and well-being.
  The dietary recommendations that follow are for adults and are
adapted from dietary guidelines developed by experts in the
Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public Health.1
Carbohydrates, Proteins, and Fats: Choosing the Healthiest
Diet books from Atkins to Zone portray carbohydrates as the
enemy. Other nutrition gurus tout low-fat, high-carbohydrate diets
to lose weight and prevent disease, or push high-protein diets as the
way to achieve good health and a healthy weight. The truth about
macronutrients and health, however, is that the type of
carbohydrate, protein, and fat we choose is much more important
than their relative amounts in our diet.
  Take carbohydrates. They are found in many types of whole and
processed foods—from apples to ziti—but not all carbohydrates are
created equal. The healthiest carbohydrates come from whole
grains, legumes, vegetables, and whole fruits. The least-healthy
carbohydrates come from white bread, white rice, pasta and other
re ned grains, sugary foods and drinks, and potatoes. We talk about
the reasons for limiting these less-healthy carbohydrates later in this
chapter. Here, let’s focus on the positive: Whole grains, vegetables,
whole fruits, and legumes are good choices as carbohydrates, and
they are also rich in vitamins, minerals, and ber. Whole-grain
foods—such as whole-wheat bread, whole oats, brown rice, millet,
barley, quinoa, and the like—deserve special mention, because
more and more research points to the bene ts of making whole
grains a daily habit. Long-term studies have found that people who
eat, on average, two or three servings of whole-grain foods a day
have a 20 to 30 percent lower risk of heart disease and diabetes,
compared with people who rarely eat whole grains.2 Eating whole
grains may also o er some protection against colon cancer, but
more research is needed on this diet-to-disease relationship.3


     Why Are Whole Grains So Good for Your Health?
        Exactly how whole grains protect against heart disease and diabetes is still
     an open research question. What we do know is that whole grains contain
       ber, which slows their digestion and makes for a gentler rise in blood
     glucose after a meal; the soluble ber in whole grains, especially the type
     found in oats, also helps lower low-density lipoprotein (LDL), the “bad”
     cholesterol. The germ in whole grains provides folate and vitamin E, and
     whole grains are also a source of magnesium and selenium—vitamins and
     minerals that may help protect against diabetes, heart disease, and some
     cancers. Yet some studies have found that the bene ts of whole grains go
     beyond what can be attributed to any individual nutrients that they contain.
     What seems more likely is that whole grains’ health bene ts accrue from their
     special combination of nutrients.4 The whole is truly greater than the sum of
     its parts—an aspect of interdependent nature.
   It’s a similar story with proteins. Plant foods or animal foods can
all provide the body with the protein it needs. But when choosing
foods high in protein, we must pay attention to the other nutrients
that travel along with the protein. The healthiest plant sources of
protein—beans, nuts, seeds, whole grains, and foods derived from
them—also contain ber, vitamins, minerals, and healthy fats, and
they are earth-friendly selections, too. Among the animal sources of
protein, some contain healthful fats ( sh) or are relatively low in
harmful fats (chicken, eggs). (For more information on choosing
healthy fats, see table 5.1 on page 105.) But red meat and full-fat
dairy products are high in a type of fat that is bad for our hearts;
furthermore, as we discuss later in this chapter, consuming red
meat, processed meat, and dairy products may increase the risk of
some cancers. Red meat and dairy products also take a terrible toll
on the environment. So to pick the healthiest sources of protein,
both for your own welfare and for that of the planet, choose plant-
based proteins from nuts, legumes, seeds, and beans. If you do have
to consume animal foods, choose sh or chicken. If you have to eat
red meat, it’s best to limit yourself to no more than once or twice a
week. Whole eggs can be a healthful source of protein but should
be consumed in moderation, since eating an egg or more a day may


increase the risk of diabetes and may increase the risk of heart
disease in people who have diabetes;5 if you have heart disease or
diabetes, you should eat less than that amount per week.
     Vegetarians and Protein:
     Variety Is Essential to Good Health
        There is one di erence between plant and animal proteins that is important
     for us, and especially for vegetarians, to understand. Our body takes the
     protein in plant and animal foods and breaks it down into smaller
     components, called amino acids, which it then uses to build and restore
     tissues and to run a multitude of functions. Some amino acids are “essential,”
     meaning that the body cannot make them and must obtain them from food.
     Others are not essential, and the body can build them by rearranging the
     essential amino acids. Proteins from animal foods are called “complete
     proteins,” meaning that they contain all the essential amino acids. Proteins
     from plant foods are called “incomplete proteins,” meaning that they tend to
     be low in one or more essential amino acids. Even so, plant proteins can meet
     your daily protein needs, as long as you choose a variety of plant foods and
     get enough calories throughout the day. So vegetarians should take care to eat
     varied high-protein vegetarian foods every day—beans (including tofu), nuts,
     seeds, and whole grains—to ensure that they get enough of all the essential
     amino acids.6
   The same “quality matters more than quantity” message is true
about fats. Some fats are so bene cial that you can enjoy them
every day, while others are so harmful that you should severely
limit them or avoid them altogether. There is an easy way to tell
healthy fats from unhealthy fats. Most of the healthy fats—the
monounsaturated and polyunsaturated fats—come from plants and
are liquid at room temperature. Rich green olive oil, golden
sun ower oil, the oil that rises to the top of a jar of natural nut
butter, and the oils that come from fatty sh are all examples of
healthy unsaturated fats. The unhealthy fats—saturated fats—and
t h e very unhealthy fats—trans fats—tend to be solid at room


temperature, such as the fat that marbles a steak or that is found in
a stick of butter or margarine. Meat and full-fat dairy products are
the biggest sources of saturated fat in the Western diet; tropical
palm and coconut oils are also high in saturated fat. The trans fat in
the Western diet comes primarily from vegetable oils that have
been partially hydrogenated, a chemical process that makes oils
more solid and stable at room temperature—and makes them
extremely harmful to our health.
   What e ect do these di erent types of fats have on our health?
Numerous studies have found that when people replace
carbohydrates in their diet with monounsaturated and
polyunsaturated fats, their blood-cholesterol pro le improves—
heart-harmful LDL cholesterol goes down, and protective high-
density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol goes up.7 Saturated fats,
meanwhile, cause both HDL and LDL to rise, so unsaturated fats are
a better choice for heart health. Trans fats are the worst kind of fat,
harmful in even small amounts.8 They drive down protective HDL
and cause a rise in damaging LDL, and they damage the cells that
line our arteries. Research also suggests that trans fats trigger
inflammation,9 a red alert in our immune system that may underlie
a number of deadly diseases, including heart disease, stroke, and
possibly diabetes. Diets high in trans fats may promote weight
gain,10 although more research is needed into the relationship
between trans fats and obesity. Furthermore, eating a low-trans-fat
diet that is high in healthy fats may lower the risk of age-related
macular degeneration.11
   Trans fats are getting a bit easier to avoid: since word has gotten
out about their ill e ects—and since manufacturers have been
required to list them on their food labels in the United States—
many food manufacturers and restaurants have begun eliminating
them from their products. It is nearly impossible to avoid all
saturated fats, however, since even healthful sources of unsaturated
fats—such as peanuts and olive oil—contain a small amount of
saturated fat. So for good health, enjoy healthy fats, limit saturated
fat, and avoid trans fat. (See table 5.1.)


To Control Your Weight, Calories Matter
While there is increasing evidence about the best carbohydrate,
protein, and fat choices for health, there has been ongoing debate
about the best choices for weight loss. Of course, to lose weight,
dieters need to eat fewer calories than they burn. The big question
has been whether the relative amounts of carbohydrate, protein,
and fat in the diet hold any particular advantage for calorie control
and weight loss. Some scientists advocate a low-fat diet, while
others stand by a lower-carbohydrate approach, or a Mediterranean-
style eating plan, with moderate amounts of healthy fats and plenty
of fruits, vegetables, and ber. Two well-designed clinical studies
with hundreds of participants that put these competing diet styles
to the test have come up with similar conclusions: people can lose
weight using any of these di erent strategies as long as they lower
the amount of calories that they consume; and having social support
for making these behavior changes may help them succeed.16
   So to achieve a healthier weight, the message is to nd a lower-
calorie eating plan that you can follow—one that lets you consume
healthy foods that you enjoy—and to nd some support for
following it. Some people may nd that support in a formal
weight-loss program; some may nd it from an online community;
some may choose to create that support within their families or
circle of friends, joining or starting a mindfulness living sangha, or
by working with colleagues to get healthier foods added to the
company cafeteria. (To nd a mindful living sangha in your area,
visit www.iamhome.org.)
   You may be wondering how many calories you should consume
each day to maintain your weight and how much to cut back to lose
weight. There’s no one answer to that question, since calorie needs
vary depending on age, gender, body size, and level of physical
activity. Some people may need only 2,000 to 2,500 calories per
day to maintain their weight, and a bit less to lose weight, while
others who have a larger body size or are very active may be able


to eat more calories yet still lose weight. As people lose weight,
their daily calorie needs drop. There are many Web sites that o er
calorie-need calculators based on your current weight and your
weight goals, and consulting a health professional, especially a
registered dietitian, about your calorie needs is also useful. As a
practical guide, an energy de cit of about 250 to 500 calories per
day can result in two to four pounds of weight loss per month, and
a safe approach to creating this energy imbalance is to moderately
reduce one’s calorie intake and increase one’s activity. This amounts
to cutting back on sugary soda by about a can a day and adding a
brisk walk daily. (See chapter 6 for more advice on physical activity
and weight loss.)


*Coconut oil is less harmful than other forms of saturated fat, since it raises HD (“good” cholesterol), so it is
fi ne to include a small amount of coconut oil in your diet.
**Margarine can be a healthful fat choice as long as it contains no trans fats and no partially hydrogenated
oils, so check the nutrition-facts label for zero trans fats, and check the ingredients list to make sure the
margarine contains no partially hydrogenated oil.
       Omega-3s—An Especially Healthy Fat


       When you choose your healthy fats, make a special e ort to include omega-
    3 fats, polyunsaturated fats that are extremely bene cial for the heart. Omega-
    3 fats appear to protect against erratic heart rhythms that may cause sudden
    death.12 They may also hold bene ts for people su ering from in ammatory
    diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis.13 Omega-3 fats are essential fats,
    meaning that our bodies cannot manufacture them and we must obtain them
    from food or supplements. So it’s a good idea to enjoy at least one omega-3-
    rich food every day.
       An earth-friendly source of omega-3s are the plant foods that contain alpha
    linolenic acid (ALA)—principally, walnuts, canola and soybean oils, axseeds
    and axseed oil, dark leafy greens, and chia seeds (also known as salvia). For
    those who consume sh, fatty sh—such as salmon, tuna, blue sh, and
    mackerel—are rich in two types of omega-3 fats, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA)
    and docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), also known as long-chain omega-3 fats.
    Much of the research on omega-3s and heart disease has focused on
    consumption of sh or sh-oil supplements.14 Our body can convert the plant
    form of omega-3 into the long-chain form, but it does so slowly, and there has
    been much scienti c debate over whether these di erent forms of omega-3
    fats work the same bene cial way in the body. Vegetarians, however, can take
    heart: newer research shows that plant omega-3s may also play an important
    role in protecting the heart, especially in people who do not regularly eat
    fish.15
Eat and Drink for Your Health and Our World: Practical Guides
Beyond the technical words like carbohydrates, proteins, and fats,
there are a few practical guidelines to follow that will steer your
eating habits in a healthier direction to control weight and help you
lower your risk of diseases.
Go with Plants
A mindful diet for weight loss should rst and foremost be a
healthy diet—both for you and for the planet. And the rst and
most essential principle of healthy eating is to shift more to a plant-
based diet. Asians in particular have practiced vegetarianism for


thousands of years. As we discussed in chapter 3, the ethical and
environmental arguments for a plant-based diet are stronger than
ever. The health bene ts for eating a plant-based diet are equally
strong.
   Decades of research on hundreds of thousands of men and
women has shown that eating a diet rich in vegetables, fruits, whole
grains, and healthy fats and low in re ned grains and unhealthy fats
can lower the risk of heart disease and diabetes.17 Some research
even suggests that people who eat little or no meat may live longer
than people who follow a more meat-heavy diet18 (although the
science isn’t de nitive and not all studies have found such a
mortality benefit19). Vegetarians and vegans tend to weigh less and
have lower blood pressure, lower blood cholesterol, and, in turn, a
lowered risk of heart disease than people whose diets include some
or all types of animal products;20 they may also have lower risks of
some cancers, though the studies are con icting and more research
is needed.21 (Of course, for optimum health, vegans must take care
to get adequate vitamin B12, vitamin D, and other nutrients they
may be missing by avoiding animal foods.)22
   There’s also strong evidence of the health hazards associated with
eating animal foods. The Center for Science in the Public Interest
estimates that the saturated fat and cholesterol in red meat, poultry,
dairy products, and eggs cause sixty-three thousand heart-disease-
related deaths a year in the United States and another eleven
hundred deaths a year from food poisoning.23 People who eat meat
and processed meat have a higher risk of diabetes than individuals
who follow a vegetarian diet.24 High levels of red-meat
consumption, and any level of processed-meat consumption, raises
the risk of colon cancer,25 and eating meat, especially meat that is
cooked to a high temperature, may increase the risk of pancreatic
cancer.26 The Nurse’s Health Study II, meanwhile, followed nearly
forty thousand women for seven years to determine the relationship
between red-meat consumption and the risk of getting early breast
cancer. It found that for every additional 3.5 ounces of red meat


consumed per day—a portion of meat about the size of a medium
fast-food hamburger—the risk of premenopausal breast cancer rose
by 20 percent.27
   You do not need to become a 100 percent vegetarian to achieve
the health bene ts of a plant-based diet. Several studies have shown
that following a “prudent” diet pattern—one that is rich in
vegetables, fruits, whole grains, and healthy fats but does include
  sh and poultry—rather than a meat-heavy diet may lower the risk
of several deadly and disabling diseases, among them diabetes,28
heart disease,29 stroke,30 and obstructive lung disease,31 as well as
lower the risk of dying from heart disease, cancer, or any other
cause.32 A similar line of research has found evidence that
following a Mediterranean-style diet pattern, which is also plant
based but includes dairy and sh, can lower the risk of heart
disease, stroke, Parkinson’s and Alzheimer’s disease, and cancer, as
well as the risk of dying from heart disease, cancer, or any other
cause.33 So you can bene t from becoming even a part-time
vegetarian.
Fill Your Plate with Vegetables of All Different Colors—And Enjoy Your Fruits Whole
When it comes to vegetables and fruits, the basic message comes
down to two words: eat more. People who eat diets rich in
vegetables and whole fruits may lower their blood pressure as well
as their risk of heart disease, stroke, diabetes, and possibly some
cancers.34 Diets rich in vegetables and fruits may lower your risk of
cataracts and macular degeneration,35 and thus help protect your
vision as you age.
   The bene ts of eating whole fruits and vegetables likely accrue
from the nutrients that they provide, as well as from the absence of
less-healthy or higher-calorie foods, which they may replace on
your plate. Fruits and vegetables are loaded with vitamins, such as
vitamin C, which gives a boost to the immune system and also acts
as a powerful antioxidant, preventing cellular damage from free
radicals; vitamin K for strong bones; and beta-carotene, a precursor


to vitamin A and also an antioxidant. They are rich in minerals,
including potassium, which may help lower blood pressure, and
magnesium, which may help control blood glucose. They are also a
great source of healthy carbohydrates, including ber. Special plant
chemicals, also known as phytochemicals, that give vegetables and
fruits their bright colors may also play bene cial roles in protecting
against disease. Lycopene, for example, a pigment that helps make
tomatoes and watermelon such a vibrant red, may protect against
prostate cancer. Lutein and zeaxanthin, other members of the
carotenoid family, may help prevent age-related macular
degeneration.
   To get the bene t of all these protective nutrients, make an e ort
to choose vegetables and fruits in a rainbow of colors every day.
Include dark green varieties, such as broccoli, kale, Brussels sprouts,
and collard greens; yellow-orange, such as sweet potato and
apricots, carrots and cantaloupe; red, such as tomatoes, watermelon,
strawberries, and red bell peppers; white, such as onions, garlic,
and cauli ower; and purple-blue, such as red cabbage, beets, and
blueberries. Make it your goal to consume at least ve servings of
vegetables and fruits a day, since several studies nd that the heart-
healthy bene ts of vegetables and fruits begin to accrue at this
level.36 More is certainly better. A serving is about half a cup of
cooked vegetables or chopped fruit, or one cup of salad greens. To
make it easier to gauge the portion, devote half of your plate to
vegetables or fruits at each meal.
   Remember to enjoy your fruit whole, not drunk as a big glass of
juice. Fruit juice—even 100 percent fruit juice—is high in rapidly
digested sugar. A glass of orange juice has as much sugar and
calories as a glass of Coca-Cola. Fruit juice also lacks the ber of
whole fruit. Indeed, the Nurses’ Health Study found that women
who drank a cup or more of fruit juice per day had a 40 to 50
percent higher risk of diabetes than women who drank fruit juice
less than once a month. Eating whole fruit, however, was associated
with a lower risk of diabetes.37
   To extend the bene ts of fruits and vegetables beyond your own


health, buy your fruits and vegetables from a local farmers’ market,
or buy a share in a community-supported farm. You’ll be
supporting your local economy, you’ll enjoy fruits and vegetables at
the peak of their freshness, and your produce will consume fewer
fossil fuels on its way from the farm to your plate. (See the
appendix for information about how to nd community-supported
farms.)
Limit Potatoes, Refined Grains, and Sweets
You may notice one vegetable that is conspicuously absent from the
list of rainbow-colored vegetables: the potato. While multiple
studies have shown the bene ts of eating fruits and vegetables,
potatoes do not seem to play a role in these observed protective
e ects. That’s because potatoes—whether their skins are brown,
red, yellow, or purple—have more in common with white bread
and white rice than they do with broccoli or bell peppers. Potatoes
contain rapidly digested starch, and large amounts of it.
   Eating a large portion of such starchy foods can send your blood
sugar on a roller coaster. First, as your body quickly converts the
starch to glucose and absorbs the glucose from the gut, blood-sugar
levels rise high; your pancreas pumps out insulin to rapidly clear
the glucose from the blood, but it may overshoot things a bit,
causing your blood sugar to dip a bit lower. This sequence of events
may lead you to feel hungry again, not long after nishing your
meal. Over time, eating diets high in such rapidly digested starchy
foods may increase your risk of heart disease and diabetes,38 and
there is evidence that limiting these types of foods in your diet may
help with weight loss.39 So eat potatoes sparingly, if at all, and
when you do, don’t count them as part of your ve-plus servings of
vegetables a day.
   Eating large amounts of re ned grains and sweets, similar to
eating lots of potatoes, can cause a rapid rise in blood sugar, a
spike in insulin, and then an equally precipitous dip in blood
glucose. Furthermore, the re ned grains that ll our supermarket


shelves—white rice, white bread, white pasta, and anything made
with white our—are nutritionally bankrupt substitutes for whole
grains. The grain-re ning process removes the bran and the germ,
taking away nearly all of the ber and many of the bene cial
vitamins and minerals. What’s left is the starchy middle, or
endosperm. Food manufacturers must, by law, add back some of
the lost nutrients to re ned grains, but they do not replace
everything that has been stripped away.
   The American Heart Association (AHA) has recommended that
Americans drastically cut back on added sugar, to help slow the
obesity and heart disease epidemics.40 The AHA’s suggested added
sugar threshold is no more than 100 calories per day (about 6
teaspoons or 24 grams of sugar) for most women and no more than
150 calories per day (about 9 teaspoons or 36 grams of sugar) for
most men. Keep in mind, however, that your body doesn’t need to
get any carbohydrate from added sugar. A good rule of thumb is to
skip products that have added sugar at or near the top of the list, or
have several sources of added sugar sprinkled throughout the list.
Take a Daily Multivitamin with Extra D to Give You a Nutritional Safety Net
If you live in the higher latitudes, spend a lot of time indoors, have
a dark skin tone, or are overweight or obese, you may be de cient
in vitamin D without even realizing it. Vegans and others who
mindfully limit their intake of animal products may also be
de cient in some nutrients, such as vitamin B12. That’s why
nutrition experts at the Harvard School of Public Health
recommend that adults take a daily multivitamin as “nutrition
insurance.”
   There’s no need to buy a fancy supplement. Even a standard
store-brand supplement will have enough of the basic vitamins and
minerals that you need. There’s also no need to take a supplement
that provides more than 100 percent of the daily value of any
vitamin or mineral, with the exception of vitamin D, a nutrient that
is critical for bone health and that scientists believe may also play a


role in preventing chronic diseases such as heart disease, some
cancers, infectious diseases, and multiple sclerosis.41 One billion
people worldwide are thought to be de cient in vitamin D, and
scientists now think that our daily vitamin D needs are much higher
than once thought.42 Few foods are naturally rich in vitamin D, and
even foods that are forti ed with vitamin D (such as milk in the
United States) do not provide much of it. Furthermore, during the
winter months, the bodies of people who live in higher latitudes
can’t make enough vitamin D from exposure to the sun. That’s why
many people may bene t from taking 1,000 to 2,000 international
units (IUs) of supplemental vitamin D a day. Since a standard
multivitamin typically provides only 400 IUs, you may want to ask
your doctor to evaluate whether you need a vitamin D supplement
in addition to your multivitamin.
   Finally, be sure to look for a multivitamin that derives most if not
all of its vitamin A from beta-carotene rather than from retinol.
Consuming high levels of retinol may increase the risk of fractures;
pregnant women should also avoid taking high levels of retinol, as
this may lead to birth defects.43
Limit Sodium
Sodium is an essential nutrient, but most of us get far more of it
each day than we need. High-sodium diets can exacerbate high
blood pressure in some individuals. Reducing sodium can lower
blood pressure and, over the long term, can also lower the risk of
heart attack and other cardiac problems.44 It’s best to limit sodium
to less than 2,300 milligrams per day—the amount found in about
one teaspoon of table salt. People who have high blood pressure or
are at risk of high blood pressure (including people over the age of
forty, African Americans, or people who have prehypertension)
should cut back further, to no more than 1,500 milligrams per day.
Indeed, the AHA now recommends that most adults cut back to
1,500 milligrams of sodium per day, since new research estimates
that 70 percent of U.S. adults fall into this high-risk, salt-sensitive


group.45
   One way to reduce the sodium in your diet is to cut back on
processed foods. Food manufacturers add loads of sodium to frozen
meals, soups, condiments, cheese, bread, and chips to cater to our
taste for saltiness, but also to improve texture and extend shelf life.
Fast-food and sit-down restaurants also o er exceptionally salty
fare; the Center for Science in the Public Interest, for example, has
found that some U.S. restaurant appetizers and entrées contain
more than a day’s worth of sodium.46
   Cutting back on processed and restaurant foods may also help
you limit the amount of another high-sodium food additive, the
  avor-enhancing monosodium glutamate (MSG)—and emerging
research suggests MSG consumption may be related to weight. A
small study in China found that people who had the highest MSG
intake were nearly three times as likely to be overweight as people
who had the lowest MSG intake.47 The ndings are preliminary,
and researchers have yet to tease out the way that MSG may be
related to weight. It’s possible that the enhanced avor of MSG-
laced food spurs people to simply eat more of it; it’s also possible
that MSG has an e ect on the brain centers or hormones that
control hunger.48
Get Enough Calcium—But Consider the Source
Calcium—the mineral that is essential for strong bones and teeth,
the steady beating of the heart, and countless other bodily functions
— h a s been the focus of much scienti c debate. The U.S.
government recommends that we consume 1,000 milligrams of
calcium per day, while the United Kingdom recommends only 700
milligrams per day. Some critics speculate that the U.S.
recommendations are shaped more by the lobbying of the powerful
dairy industry than they are by the scientific evidence.49
   There’s also been debate about how best to get calcium. The U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services and the Department of
Agriculture’s Dietary Guidelines for Americans recommends that


adults consume three glasses of milk a day. Yet milk and dairy
foods are high in unhealthy saturated fat. Even fat-free milk has
about eighty calories per glass, and three glasses can really bust the
calorie budget of someone trying to lose weight.
   This debate over milk gets even more complicated when one
considers the relationship between dairy, calcium, and chronic
disease. Dairy consumption can protect against colon cancer in
modest amounts;50 high levels of dairy intake on their own,
however, do not seem to o er protection against fractures late in
life.51 If there were no harm in consuming high amounts of dairy
and calcium, this would be purely an academic debate. But studies
raise the disturbing possibility that high levels of milk or calcium
intake are associated with increased risk of prostate cancer in men
and that high levels of lactose intake are associated with increased
risk of ovarian cancer in women.52
   Milk production also has a huge environmental impact, as we
described in chapter 3. And there is an ethical implication of
drinking milk, since the treatment of cows on dairy farms is often
not very compassionate and cows who can no longer produce milk
are then slaughtered. The dairy and beef industries are closely
linked, so even if you do not consume the meat of cows or wear
leather made from them, someone else does.
   So what is the best way to get calcium? If you plan your diet
carefully, you can get enough calcium from nondairy sources—
among them, leafy green vegetables, calcium-set tofu, and tahini.
For some people who eat a vegan diet, however, they may want to
consider taking calcium supplements or making sure to consume
calcium-forti ed soy, grain, or nut-milk beverages, a small glass of
calcium-forti ed juice, or calcium-forti ed cold cereals. If you do
want to consume dairy products, having a modest amount—no
more than one or two servings per day—and eating a healthy diet
rich in vegetables and legumes can also provide adequate calcium.
An additional bene t of taking calcium supplements is that they are
often fortified with vitamin D, which helps calcium absorption.


Choose Healthy Drinks
Water is the best drink choice for health and weight loss. Sugary
drinks are the worst choice, since consuming them in excess
contributes to the risk of obesity, diabetes, and possibly even heart
disease.53 Sometimes, however, it is not that obvious that a
beverage is high in sugar and calories. If you mindfully read the
nutrition-facts label, you will see that natural “100 percent fruit
juice” has as many calories and as much sugar as a soda. Grape
juice and cranberry juice cocktails have more sugar and calories
than a soda. If you enjoy juice, stick to one small glass a day, about
the size of an old-fashioned “juice glass” (4 to 6 ounces). Energy
drinks and sports drinks also contain lots of sugar, though drink
marketers often try to disguise these beverages as “healthy” by
boasting about the vitamins, electrolytes, antioxidants, or herbs they
contain. Don’t be fooled. Keep in mind that there are many
di erent types of sugar added to drinks—cane sugar, honey, high-
fructose corn syrup, fruit-juice concentrates—but to the body, they
are all sources of extra calories and sugar. Diet drinks, sweetened
with arti cial sweeteners, may not be the best alternative, since it is
unclear what their long-term effects are on weight and health.
   The Department of Nutrition at the Harvard School of Public
Health has developed a “tra c-light” system for ranking beverages
(see gure 5.1).54 Those highest in sugar—sugary sodas, fruit juices,
smoothies, and sports drinks—fall into the “red” category: “drink
sparingly and in-frequently, if at all.” Slightly sweet beverages—
those that have no more than one gram of sugar per ounce and are
free of arti cial sweeteners—fall into the “yellow” category: “a
better choice, but don’t overdo it.” The “green” beverages are your
best bet—beverages that are sugar-free naturally, such as water or
sparkling water. Tea or co ee can be a healthy choice for most
people, in moderation (up to three or four cups a day) and may
even have some health benefits.55 Skip the sugar and cream to keep
these beverages low-calorie and healthful. Pregnant women may
want to limit their ca eine. People who get jittery or have sleep
problems when they consume ca eine may also want to limit


caffeine.
Figure 5.1 HOW SWEET IS IT?
Calories and teaspoons of sugar in 12 ounces of each beverage
Copyright © 2009 Harvard University. For more information, see
The Nutrition Source, Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of
Public Health, http://www.thenutritionsource.org.
Be Mindful of Alcohol Consumption
From a health perspective, alcohol should be limited, if you
consume it at all. Heavy drinking increases the risk of chronic
diseases such as hypertension; cirrhosis; esophageal, breast and
colon cancers; and alcoholism.56 Alcoholism also takes a
tremendous toll on families, communities, and nations. Worldwide,
alcohol consumption has been estimated to cause one in twenty-five
deaths, and the cost of alcohol to society—an estimated 1 percent of
gross domestic product in high-and middle-income countries—
includes the cost of both alcohol-fueled chronic diseases and
alcohol-related social problems.57 Although moderate drinking can
lower the risk of heart disease and diabetes,58 it can also raise the


risk of breast cancer and colon cancer.59 If you do not drink, there’s
no reason to start drinking, since there are many other ways to
improve your heart health and lower your risk of diabetes.
(Skipping sugary drinks is one way; exercising more is another.)
   Scienti cally, moderate drinking is de ned as no more than one
drink per day for women and no more than two drinks per day for
men, and until middle age, the risks outweigh the bene ts.60 Yet
even drinking in moderation can be the beginning of alcoholism for
some people. Although you yourself may always be on guard about
not becoming addicted to alcohol and can safely drink a glass of
wine occasionally without overindulging, this may not be the case
for your children, your grandchildren, and other loved ones. Every
time you drink in front of them, you may be increasing the
likelihood that they will drink in the future. And they may grow up
and become dependent on alcohol. By abstaining from alcohol
completely, you become a role model for them and may help to
protect them from turning to alcohol as a habit or in times of stress
and di culty. Alcohol is an addictive substance.61 Having the rst
glass may lead to the second and the third. When you see that as a
society, we are in great danger because of how we use alcohol,
refraining from the rst glass of wine is a manifestation of your
enlightenment. You do it for all of us.
   We must look deeply to see that when we practice mindful
consumption we practice not only for ourselves but for others. The
way you live your life is for your ancestors, future generations, and
your whole society. Even if we completely refrain from all drinking,
we can still get killed by a drunk driver, so to help one person stop
drinking is to make the world safer for everyone. When we can be
free from the shell of our small self and see our interrelatedness to
everyone and everything, we understand that our every act is linked
with all of humanity, with the whole cosmos. To stay healthy is to
be kind to your ancestors, your parents, future generations, and also
your society.
   From the standpoint of mindfulness and compassion, we
encourage you to abstain from alcohol. As in the case of meat


consumption, reducing alcohol consumption can impact world
hunger, as the grains and foods used in alcohol production can be
used instead for direct human consumption. If you are unable to
completely stop drinking, then at least reduce the amount you
drink by one-third, one-half, or two-thirds. No one can practice
perfectly, including the Buddha. Even vegetarian dishes are not
entirely vegetarian. Boiling vegetables kills the bacteria living in
them. Although we cannot be perfect, because of the real danger
alcoholism poses to our society, destroying many families and
causing much su ering, we should practice to reduce or completely
stop our alcohol consumption. We have to live in a way that will
avoid the tragedy alcohol abuse can create. This is why even if you
can be very healthy while enjoying one glass of wine every week,
we still urge you to look deeply into the detrimental e ects of
alcohol on our society and do the best you can to minimize alcohol
consumption. Whenever you drink alcohol, ask yourself: Do I really
want to drink this? And if you are going to drink, drink mindfully.
The Practice of Mindful Eating
Now that we’ve covered the basics of healthy eating, let’s focus on
how to eat mindfully so that we truly enjoy our food and eat with
compassion and understanding. Mindful eating means simply eating
or drinking while being aware of each bite or sip. You can practice
it at any meal, whether you are alone in your kitchen or with others
in a crowded restaurant. You can even practice mindful drinking
when you pause to take a sip of water at your desk. Mindful eating
allows us to fully appreciate the sensory delight of eating and to be
more conscious of the amount and nature of all that we eat and
drink. When practiced to its fullest, mindful eating turns a simple
meal into a spiritual experience, giving us a deep appreciation of
all that went into the meal’s creation as well a deep understanding
of the relationship between the food on our table, our own health,
and our planet’s health.
   Engaging in mindful eating, even if only for a few minutes, can


help you recognize how the practice of mindfulness encompasses
all spheres and activities, including ordinary tasks. Take drinking a
glass of water: if we are fully aware that we are drinking the water,
and we are not thinking of anything else, we are drinking with our
whole body and mind. While eating, we can also be aware of how
we feel and of how we consume, whether we are truly hungry, and
whether we are making the best choices for our health and the
health of the planet.
   Mindful eating sees each meal as representative of the whole
cosmos. Recall the apple meditation from chapter 2. Look closely at
an apple and you can see a cloud oating in it, as well as the rain,
the earth, and the sunshine that made the apple tree ower and
fruit. Recognize that this apple contains the universe. When you bite
into the apple, can you be fully aware that this is a miracle from
the universe that you have just put into your mouth? Notice that
there is nothing else in your mouth as you chew, no worries or
anxiety. When you chew the apple, just chew the apple, not your
future plans or anger. You must chew very consciously and with
focus. When you are able to be there for the apple 100 percent, you
will feel connected to the earth, to the farmer who grew the apple,
and also to the person who brought it to your table. Eating this
way, you feel that strength, freedom, and pleasure are attainable.
This meal nourished not only your body but also your mind—your
whole being. Let’s see how a mindful chef would apply these
practices in the kitchen and at the dinner table.
Chef Sati Invites You to Dinner
Chef Sati—a chef and Buddhist teacher—invited us to dinner to
introduce us to the art of mindful cooking and eating. He promised
that his dishes would enlighten our senses and that the evening
would simply be an opportunity to touch the joy of life, but we
would all have to take an active part in the meal.
   He placed an array of colorful vegetables, whole grains, and
spices on the counter. As we washed the vegetables, he said, “In
these vegetables, I see the sun, the earth, the clouds, the rain, and


numerous other phenomena, including the hard work of the
farmers. These fresh vegetables are gifts of the universe. Washing
them, we know we are also washing the sun, the earth, the sky, and
the farmers.” Because we were attentive to what we were doing, we
touched the interdependent nature that makes life possible and felt
deep joy to be living in the present moment.
   The host made a wonderful soup with mushrooms; a salad
bursting with red, yellow, orange, burgundy, and green colors;
oven-fresh whole-grain bread with nuts; and, along with other
dishes, what appeared to be a chicken dish with a wonderful sauce,
decorated with green onions and cilantro. The kitchen was lled
with brilliant colors and ne textures of various ingredients, aroma
from di erent herbs and spices, sizzling and bubbling music from
the stove—all leading to the mouthwatering dishes that were
masterfully prepared. All of our senses came alive. Working
together, we prepared all the dishes in no time at all.
   As we sat down around the dinner table, we looked at the empty
plates in front of us that we were eager to ll with the scrumptious
food that Chef Sati had assembled in the middle of the table. He
gently exclaimed, “It’s so wonderful for us to be together, and I am
so grateful we can share this dinner because in many other parts of
the world, our empty plates might remain empty for a long time.
Eating is a very deep practice. Let’s learn to eat with compassion
and understanding.” There was plenty of food on the table, but he
suggested that we start by taking only a small portion rst.
Following his cues, before we served ourselves we smiled at each
other, looked at the food, and smiled to it with gratitude. When we
picked up our piece of bread, we did not devour it immediately.
Behind the tenderness and the inviting aroma of the bread, we tried
to look deeply into it—to see the sunshine inside, the cloud inside,
the earth inside. We saw also all past generations of wheat plants
leading up to the wheat of our times, as well as all the many
generations of farmers and scientists who contributed to the
evolution of the wheat and bread industry. The bread carried a lot
of love and care of many people, including our dinner host. When


we had seen clearly the real piece of bread, we put it into our
mouth and chewed it mindfully—chewing and tasting only the
bread, and not the worries in our minds. This way, we truly
enjoyed the bread and could fully receive it as a gift from the
universe. The piece of bread in our mouth was a miracle, each of us
was a miracle, and the present moment of being together was also a
miracle.
   As we slowly ate the bread, soup, salad, and other dishes, we
became fully aware of each bite, awakening all of our senses. We
started to deepen our relationship with the food and to feel how
we were all connected in a miraculous way.
   Knowing the long history of vegetarianism in Buddhism, we
asked our host about the chicken dish. He said, “This may be a
surprise to you, but the chicken dish was not prepared with real
chicken meat. It is made with soy and wheat gluten, by infusing the
glutinous protein with spices and sauces to simulate the avor and
texture of chicken. I included this dish to ensure there would be
enough protein in the meal.” The dish was indeed as avorful as it
looked. He further explained, “I don’t use real chicken meat or any
other kinds of meats or animal products in cooking because it
harms the environment and is not compassionate toward animals.”
The wholesomeness of the chicken dish was truly amazing, and we
enjoyed every bite of it. We felt fortunate that we could sit down
and enjoy a meal like this, being so present to the food and our
friends.
   After we nished our meal and had all commented on how good
it felt to eat in this peaceful, mindful way, our host unabashedly
asked us to help wash the dishes. We knew, of course, that there
was another valuable mindfulness experience coming. The idea of
doing the dishes was not exactly fun. But once he stood in front of
the sink and tenderly and joyfully cleaned the plates with as much
care as he had cooked all the wonderful dishes, we rolled up our
sleeves and took turns washing as well. He explained that we
needed to be mindful of everything we did, including the most
mundane of chores such as dishwashing. We should be fully aware


of the plates, the water, the amount of detergent, and each hand
movement with the sponge. We could wash each dish with the
same care that we would use if we were bathing a baby. We had to
pay full attention to the task. Any distraction that disengaged us
from the dishes would take us away from experiencing the present
moment, a valuable moment in which we and the dishes are
related. Sounding like a light breeze, he o ered, “We should do the
dishes just to do the dishes. We should live fully in the moment
while washing them, not think about dessert or about going home.
Otherwise, we miss an important appointment with life.”
   After we cheerfully nished putting away the dishes, we made a
light, fragrant tea to accompany our dessert, which was a
composition of fresh green, yellow, and red melons carefully cut in
triangular wedges and presented beautifully on each plate. Chef Sati
showed us how to drink tea. He held a cup of tea in his hands,
breathed in the fragrance consciously a few times, and said,
“Conscious breathing will bring the body and mind together. When
the mind and body become one, we feel solid and become fully
present for the tea. As we drink our tea, we should be completely
aware that we are drinking the tea. When we truly meet the tea in
the present moment, we feel alive. Only then are we really living
our life.” After a few attentive sips, we all experienced that
drinking tea had become the most important thing at that moment.
The light green tea and delicious melons complemented each other
perfectly.
   As we relaxed into the evening, we felt nourished—not only
physically, but also spiritually. We did not feel stu ed but rather
perfectly satisfied, content, fortunate, and peaceful.
Eating Mindfully Every Day
We may not all have an opportunity to dine with a Chef Sati, but
we should try to follow his valuable example as much as possible.
   At home, reserve a time for dinner. Turn o the TV; put away the
newspapers, magazines, mail, and homework. If you are eating


with others, work together to help prepare dinner. Each of you can
help with washing the vegetables, cooking, or setting the table.
When all the food is on the table, sit down and practice conscious
breathing a few times to bring your body and mind together, and
recover yourselves from a hard day’s work. Be fully present for each
other, and for the food in front of you.
  After a few conscious breaths, look at each other with a gentle
smile and acknowledge each other’s presence. If you are eating
alone, don’t forget to smile to yourself. Breathing and smiling are so
easy to do, yet their e ects are very powerful in helping us and
others to feel at ease. When we look at the food in such a moment
of peace, the food becomes real and reveals our connection with it
and with everything else. The extent to which we see our
interrelationship with the food depends on the depth of our
mindfulness practice. We may not always be able to see and taste
the whole universe every time we eat, but we can do our best to eat
as mindfully as possible.
  When we look at our food on the table, it is helpful to name each
dish: “pea soup,” “salad,” and so on. Calling something by its name
helps us touch it deeply and see its true nature. And mindfulness
reveals to us the presence or absence of toxins in each dish so that
we can stop eating something that is not good for us. Children
enjoy naming and recognizing foods when we show them how.
  Being with our family and friends to enjoy food is precious. Many
people are hungry and without family. When we eat in
mindfulness, we generate compassion in our heart for them. With
compassion and understanding, we can strengthen our commitment
to helping nourish the hungry and lonely people around us.
Mindful eating is a good education. If you practice this way for
some time, you will nd that you will eat more carefully, and your
practice of mindful eating will be an example for others. It is an art
to eat in a way that brings mindfulness into our life.
The Seven Practices of a Mindful Eater


One way to incorporate mindfulness into your meals is to simply
use the breath. Before eating, make a practice of pausing. Breathe
in and out a few times so that you can be one with the food you are
about to eat. Mindful eating takes dedicated practice, and there are
seven practices that you can develop to help you eat mindfully for
good health.
   1. HONOR THE FOOD. Start the meal with the ve
     contemplations, or with whatever traditional grace or prayer
     you prefer to use to express your gratitude.
                                 The Five Contemplations
            1. This food is the gift of the whole universe: the earth, the sky,
              numerous living beings, and much hard, loving work.
            2. May we eat with mindfulness and gratitude so as to be worthy
              to receive it.
            3. May we recognize and transform our unwholesome mental
              formations, especially our greed, and learn to eat with
              moderation.
            4. May we keep our compassion alive by eating in such a way that
              we reduce the suffering of living beings, preserve our planet,
              and reverse the process of global warming.
            5. We accept this food so that we may nurture our sisterhood and
              brotherhood, strengthen our community, and nourish our ideal
              of serving all living beings.
       If you are eating with others, steer mealtime conversations
     toward the food: acknowledge the local farmer who grew
     your lettuce and tomatoes, thank the person who prepared
     the salad; or talk about other topics that help nourish your
     gratitude and connection to your food and each other.
     Refrain from hashing over work or the latest atrocities in the
     news. Refrain from arguing. This can help you make sure
     that you are chewing only your food, not your frustrations. In


  Vietnam it is a custom to never chastise anyone while they
  are eating, so as not to disturb their eating and digestion. We
  can learn from this very commonsense wisdom. Eating in this
  way, we have the opportunity to sit with people we love
  and to savor precious food, something that is often scarce for
  many people in the world.
     At all Plum Village practice centers, we eat our meals in
  silence during the rst twenty minutes of the meal so that we
  are fully immersed in the experience of eating. We
  encourage you to experiment with a silent meal at home—
  even just a silent cup of tea. But you do not need to eat every
  meal in silence to become a more mindful eater. You can
  start by simply unplugging from daily distractions during
  mealtime: turn o the television, the laptop, the cell phone,
  so there is no watching, no surfing, no texting.
2. ENGAGE ALL SIX SENSES. As you serve and eat your meal,
  notice the sounds, colors, smells, and textures as well as your
  mind’s response to them, not just the taste. When you put
  the rst bite of food in your mouth, pause brie y before
  chewing and notice its taste as though it was the rst time
  you had ever tasted it. With more practice in engaging all of
  your senses, you may notice that your tastes change,
  increasing your enjoyment of what you may once have
  perceived as “boring” health foods.
3. SERVE IN MODEST PORTIONS. Moderation is an essential
  component of mindful eating. Not only does making a
  conscious e ort to choose smaller portions help you avoid
  overeating and weight gain; it is also less wasteful of your
  household food budget and our planet’s resources. Using a
  small dinner plate, no larger than nine inches across, and
  filling it only once can help you eat more moderately.
4. SAVOR SMALL BITES, AND CHEW THOROUGHLY.
  Consciously choosing smaller bites and chewing them well
  can help you slow down your meal as well as allow you to


  fully experience the taste of your food. It can also help
  improve your digestion, since the process of breaking down
  our foods begins with enzymes in the mouth. Chew each bite
  until the food is lique ed in your mouth; that may be twenty
  to forty times, depending on what you are eating. Chewing
  well allows your tongue and palate to taste the food better.
  Once you have swallowed this bite, you will still be able to
  savor the wonderful taste that the food offers you.
5. EAT SLOWLY TO AVOID OVEREATING. Eating slowly may
  help you notice when you are feeling pleasantly satis ed so
  that you can stop before you have eaten too much. There is a
  di erence between feeling that you have had just about
  enough to eat and feeling as though you have eaten all that
  you can possibly eat. Mindful eaters practice the former so
  that they are not overtaxing their bodies—or overtaxing the
  planet’s resources—by consuming more food than they need.
  In Chinese medicine, it is recommended to eat only until you
  are 80 percent full and never to “top o your tummy,”
  because this weakens the digestive power of your stomach
  and intestines, putting too much stress on them over the long
  haul. There is ongoing scienti c research on the e ects of
  caloric restriction on longevity, though the results are far
  from conclusive in humans.62 Of course, avoiding overeating
  is half of the secret to weight control. (Getting enough
  activity is the other half, and we discuss this more in chapter
  6.)
     One way to slow down is to consciously put your eating
  utensils down in between bites. Be aware of your body as
  you eat. When we eat mindfully, we are relaxed and calm.
  There is no rush to attend to other tasks; there is no hurry.
  There is only the present moment. To help you practice this,
  make sure to allow enough time to enjoy the meal. If your
  mealtime is short—for example, during your lunch break at
  work—plan on a smaller meal rather than cramming down a
  large meal quickly.


6. DON’T SKIP MEALS. Skipping meals can make it harder to
   make mindful choices. When hunger consumes us, the strong
   forces of habit energy may lead us to grab whatever foods
   are close at hand—be they from a vending machine or a fast-
   food restaurant—and these foods may not further our
   healthy-eating or weight-loss goals. So-called grazing—
   moving from one food to another, a few bites of this, a few
   bites of that, without ever sitting down to a regular meal—
   can also work against your healthy-weight goals, because you
   may consume more food than you realize without ever
   feeling truly satis ed. So give yourself the opportunity to
   make mindful choices throughout the day; plan regular
   meals and, if it suits you, healthy snacks in between. It is also
   good to eat your meals at the same time each day, to help
   your body settle into a consistent rhythm. And give yourself
   enough time to fully savor your food so that you are aware
   of all the sensory delights your meals have to offer.
7. EAT A PLANT-BASED DIET, FOR YOUR HEALTH AND FOR
   THE PLANET. When mindful eaters look deeply at the meal
   they are about to eat, they see far beyond the rim of the
   plate. They see the dangerous toll that eating some types of
   animal foods can take on their bodies—the higher risks of
   colon cancer from red meat and processed meats, for
   example, or the higher risk of heart disease from the
   saturated fat found in meat and dairy products. And they see
   the equally dangerous and destructive toll that meat
   production and dairy farming take on our environment.
   Researchers at the University of Chicago estimate that, when
   it’s all added up, the average American could do more to
   reduce global warming emissions by going vegetarian than
   by switching from a Camry to a Prius.63 Even just switching
   from red meat and dairy to poultry or eggs for one day a
   week could have a measurable impact on global warming—
   and a bigger environmental impact than choosing locally
   sourced foods.64


Watch Out for Mindless Traps
We have talked about what to eat and how to enjoy our meals. We
all would like to eat healthfully, but we also have our own internal
knots, the strong habit energies that distract us from practicing
mindfulness. People are more likely to eat healthfully if they
believe that they are capable of doing so; if they believe doing so
will have health bene ts; if they have support from family and
friends; and if healthy eating is the norm for most of their family
members or coworkers.65 People are also more likely to eat well if
their community or workplace makes it easier to do so—if, for
example, they live near supermarkets or if their worksite cafeterias
and vending machines offer healthy foods.66
   Likewise, barriers to healthy eating can exist within the person or
within the environment the person is immersed in. Not wanting to
give up favorite foods, not liking the taste of healthy foods, not
trusting experts’ seemingly ever-changing dietary advice—all of this
can hinder our e orts to be healthy. People who live in “food
deserts” without easy access to a supermarket may nd it harder to
eat fresh fruits and vegetables, and people who live in
neighborhoods surrounded by fast-food restaurants may nd it all
too easy to choose higher-calorie, less-nutritious foods.67 Food
prices may also be a barrier: lower-calorie, more-nutritious foods,
such as fruits and vegetables and sh, are more costly per calorie
than higher-calorie, less-nutritious foods, such as re ned grains and
sweets.68 Agricultural policies, food labeling, and food advertising
can in uence which foods are available to us in a supermarket or
restaurant, whether we are aware of their nutrient bene ts (or
detriments), and whether we decide to eat them.
   We will discuss how to build social support for healthy eating, as
well as what steps you can take to advocate for a healthier food
environment, in the following chapters. Here we will focus on the
personal perspective: what are some of the common food-related
habits that may be getting in the way of eating healthfully and


achieving a healthier weight—and what are some tips to change
them? Once you identify these personal barriers to healthy eating,
you can start to overcome them and begin to make every meal a
healthier one.
Do You Skip Breakfast or Other Meals?
Fewer people in the United States are starting the day with
breakfast,69 and our increasing failure to “break the fast” every
morning may be contributing to the obesity epidemic. Research
suggests that people who skip breakfast tend to weigh more and
gain more weight over time than people who eat breakfast.70 The
National Weight Control Registry gathered information on the
breakfast habits of nearly three thousand people who had lost and
kept o signi cant amounts of weight, and found that nearly 80
percent of them report eating breakfast every day, while only 4
percent report skipping breakfast.71 Scientists are still teasing out
the nature of the relationship between breakfast and weight. It’s
possible that eating breakfast may help curb our hunger later in the
day—and, in turn, the number of calories we eat, especially if the
breakfast includes protein or ber, such as that found in whole
grains and fruits.72
   Dieting books give all sorts of advice about when to have your
meals—eat six small meals a day, stick to three meals a day and
eschew snacks, don’t eat after 8 P.M., and so on. The truth is that
there’s no “perfect” meal pattern that ts everyone’s lifestyle or that
is guaranteed to promote weight loss. A good approach, however, is
to spread your food intake throughout the day.73 This may mean
three meals (one of them breakfast) and a snack or two, or four
“mini-meals.”
   If skipping breakfast or other meals has become a habit, consider
these suggestions for how to change your habit:
               PREPARE YOUR BREAKFAST OR PACK YOUR
            LUNCH THE NIGHT BEFORE. If you nd that you are


           skipping breakfast or lunch because you don’t have
           enough time to prepare it in the morning, plan
           breakfasts and lunches that can be assembled before
           you go to sleep. For lunch, set aside some of your
           dinner leftovers in a container, add a whole-wheat roll
           and piece of fruit or some baby carrots, and put it in a
           sack in the fridge so it will be ready for you to grab on
           your way out the door in the morning.
              BROADEN YOUR IDEA OF BREAKFAST. Some
           people skip breakfast simply because they do not enjoy
           traditional U.S. breakfast foods such as cold cereal and
           milk or eggs and toast. There’s no reason to have such a
           limited palate. Try whole-grain hot cereals, combining
           whole grains and seeds such as sesame seeds, whole
           oats, whole rye, whole barley, millet, quinoa, and
           whole buckwheat. For convenience, you can cook a
           batch that lasts for a few days. Or try an Asian
           breakfast, with tofu or sh, vegetables, and brown rice.
           Make a breakfast burrito with beans, salsa, and a stone-
           ground-corn tortilla. Even last night’s leftovers can
           make a nourishing and satisfying breakfast.
              MAKE SURE YOU’VE GOT A GOOD APPETITE FOR
           BREAKFAST. Overeating at night may make you less
           hungry for breakfast in the morning. If you’re a
           nighttime snacker who has little appetite in the
           morning, you may want to try curbing your nighttime
           snacking to see if that improves your appetite for
           breakfast the next day. In extreme cases, eating at night
           may be characterized as “night eating syndrome,”
           which we discuss later in this chapter.
Do You Speed-Eat?
It has become common advice for dieters: “eat slowly and chew
your food well.” And it certainly makes intuitive sense. The theory,
popularized nearly forty years ago,74 is that it takes twenty minutes


for our brains to register that our stomachs are full, and that when
we eat too quickly, we speed through the physical and hormonal
“stop” signs and overeat. Eating more slowly may also give us more
pleasure from our food as we take time to savor every bite. Many,
many researchers have sought to test this notion, sometimes with
conflicting results,75 but recent support for the theory comes from a
small study at the University of Rhode Island.76 Researchers asked
thirty women to eat a meal rapidly and, several days later, to eat a
meal slowly (or vice versa), and measured the amount of food they
ate and how satis ed they felt at the end of each meal. When the
women ate a meal slowly, they consumed fewer calories and drank
more water than when they ate a meal rapidly. After the slow meal,
they reported greater satiety than they did after the fast meal. So
although they ate less than at the faster meal, they felt more
satis ed and full. It’s interesting to note that Japanese studies on
eating speed and weight control have found that people who say
they eat rapidly weigh more and are more likely to be obese than
people who say that they eat slowly.77
   If speed-eating has become a habit, consider these tips to slow
down and savor your food:
             MAKE YOUR FIRST BITE—AND EVERY BITE—A
           MINDFUL BITE. Remember the apple meditation in
           chapter 2, where we asked you to pay attention—to
           feel the weight of the apple in your hand, notice its
           color and smell, and think about all the natural and
           human forces that aligned to bring it from the earth to
           your hand? We suggest that you do the same before
           you begin eating all of your meals.
             TAKE SMALL BITES, CHEW YOUR FOOD
           THOROUGHLY, AND PUT DOWN YOUR UTENSILS IN
           BETWEEN EACH BITE. This has also been standard
           advice for people seeking to lose weight. And the
           University of Rhode Island study, which instructed
           participants to use these techniques during the slow


           meal, showed that taking these steps can help people
           slow down. Study participants’ slow meals lasted, on
           average, nearly thirty minutes—about twenty minutes
           longer than their fast meals. Using smaller spoons and
           forks or using chopsticks (especially if you are not
           accustomed to using chopsticks) may help you train
           yourself to take smaller bites.
Do You Mindlessly Overeat Large Portions?
Often people overeat without being aware that they are overeating.
They eat too much because they are snacking out of a supersize bag
of chips, they have been served a heaping plate of food, they are
watching television while they eat or because of any number of
external cues that have nothing to do with hunger. Dr. Brian
Wansink of Cornell University calls this type of eating “mindless
eating,” and he and other researchers have demonstrated the many
ways that our environment can trigger us to simply eat too much.78
Certainly there is ample opportunity to overeat: over the past few
decades, portions have grown to gargantuan sizes in restaurants,
grocery stores, and homes—even in the all-American classic
cookbook Joy of Cooking.79 These large portions lead us to
unconsciously rede ne what a “normal” portion size is, and also
make it harder to estimate just how much we are eating.80 Having
tempting foods in sight, being distracted by a magazine, being
offered a variety of foods—all can lead to mindless overeating.81
  If you have gotten into the habit of eating with your eyes rather
than your stomach, consider these tips to help you mindfully
monitor your portion sizes:82
              USE SMALLER PLATES AND SERVING UTENSILS.
           Downsizing your plates, bowls, and serving spoons may
           help you downsize your portions.
              AVOID DISTRACTIONS WHILE EATING. It makes
           intuitive sense that watching television during meals


            could lead you to pay less attention to what you are
            eating and how full you are—and in turn contribute to
            mindless overeating. Other distractions—a movie, a
            social gathering, workplace demands—could have a
            similar e ect. So separate eating from watching
            television or other activities. When you are engaged in
            a pleasantly distracting activity that revolves around
            food—such as a dinner party—recognize that you need
            to pay greater attention to what you put on your plate
            and in your mouth. Periodically take regular, mindful
            breaths throughout the meal to help you remember to
            come back to your body and check in with your
            stomach. Relaxing your whole body with your mindful
            breathing as you eat is a good way to help you stay in
            tune with yourself and your meal and to avoid
            overeating.
               ASK YOURSELF, “AM I SURE IT’S HEALTHY?” Our
            belief that a product is healthy or that a restaurant
            serves healthy food—what Wansink and colleagues call
            a “health halo”—can lead us astray when it comes to
            choosing moderate portions. People were more likely
            to underestimate the number of calories in a Subway
            meal than in a McDonald’s meal, perhaps because of
            the sandwich chain’s heavy marketing of itself as a
            “healthy” option, with its well-known advertisements
            featuring a famous customer’s weight loss.83 Before you
            place your order, stop, take a deep breath, and don’t
            lose your mindful outlook just because a food is
            pitched as “healthy.” Healthy foods have calories, and
            keeping calories in check is the key to weight loss.
Do You Eat a Lot at Night?
It’s a common complaint from people who are trying hard to eat
healthfully: “I make great choices all day, but after dinner, I just
can’t stop snacking.” For some people, night eating means


mindlessly munching on a bag of chips while they watch television
or dishing out a bowl of ice cream as a reward for a stressful day.
For others, so-called night eating syndrome is a more serious
disorder of their circadian rhythms, one in which they consume at
least 25 percent of their daily calories after dinner or wake up in
the middle of the night to eat, leaving them with little or no
appetite for breakfast.84 Although night eating syndrome is not
technically classi ed as an eating disorder just yet, it is estimated
that anywhere from 6 to 16 percent of people enrolled in weight-
reduction programs su er from it85 and that it can interfere with
attempts to lose weight.86 You may not have full-blown night
eating syndrome (if you believe you do, consult with a
professional), but if you nd that nighttime has become
synonymous with unhealthy snack time, consider these tips:
             FIND SOMETHING ELSE TO DO WITH YOUR
          HANDS. Knit, make a scrapbook, read a book out loud
          to your children, play chess—do something to keep
          your hands busy and your mind engaged so that you
          will be less tempted to turn to food.
             TURN OFF THE TELEVISION. As we will discuss,
          people tend to eat mindlessly when they watch
          television, and they tend to eat what they see in the
          commercials—mostly unhealthy snacks. Turning o the
          television and nding another nighttime activity can
          help you break the “eat-and-watch” habit.
             BE AWARE OF WHERE YOU WORK. Checking your
          e-mail at the kitchen table after dinner can mean that
          you are too close to tempting snacks. Move to a
          di erent room. If you must work in the kitchen, keep
          the most tempting foods out of sight.87
             REDUCE YOUR STRESS. There’s evidence that stress
          may trigger night eating syndrome and that lowering
          stress may help curb it: night eaters in a small one-
          week study who listened to a nightly twenty-minute


            muscle-relaxation tape before going to sleep reported
            less nighttime hunger and eating, and lower stress, than
            night eaters who did not de-stress.88 This is a good time
            to try out the meditations o ered throughout this book
            and on the companion Web site for this book. Or try
            some other relaxing activities, such as listening to soft
            music, reading a book, or taking a bath.
               GO TO SLEEP EARLIER. As we discussed in chapter
            1, people who get less sleep tend to weigh more than
            people who get a good night’s rest, and one reason
            may simply be that staying up later gives people more
            hours in the day to eat. Getting enough sleep may also
            help curb hunger during the day.
               IF YOU DO SNACK IN THE EVENING, CHOOSE
            FRESH FRUITS AND VEGETABLES. If you mindfully
            decide to answer your body’s call for nighttime
            munchies, do it with fresh vegetables or fruits. They
            come packed with ber, they ll you up quickly, and
            most don’t have that many calories.
Do You Often Eat Fast Food or Restaurant Meals?
Americans spend more than 40 percent of their food budgets on
food away from home,89 and research has found that meals
prepared outside the home tend to be less healthful than what we
cook up in our own kitchens.90 The best thing to do when you are
trying to lose weight is to cut out fast food completely. Even the
“healthy” choices aren’t usually that healthy. Consider these tips to
make the healthiest choices when you are out at fast-food or regular
restaurants:
               DO YOUR RESEARCH AHEAD OF TIME. Many
            restaurants now have nutrition information available
            online, and it may surprise you. At some fast-food
            restaurants, for example, a small sandwich may be


            lower in calories than a large salad loaded with cheese
            and toppings.
               ORDER SMALLER PORTIONS. When we eat at a
            restaurant, once the food appears on our plates,
            chances are good that we will eat it—and the larger the
            portions, the more we will eat. So order a small
            appetizer instead of an entrée, share an entrée with
            your dining companion, or ask the waiter to bring you
            a “to go” container with your meal so that you can put
            half of your meal in the container before you have a
            chance to overindulge. And skip the extras—bread and
            butter, unlimited sugary fountain drinks—to save your
            appetite and calories for more nutritious and satisfying
            foods.
               DON’T BUY THE FAST-FOOD “MEALS.” Going à la
            carte at a fast-food restaurant may cost a little bit more,
            even for buying less food, but who really needs to be
            tempted by the fteen hundred calories in a complete
            meal with large fries, big burger, and thirty ounces of
            sugary soda? You’ll be surprised at how lling a
            smaller sandwich and smaller fries can be, especially if
            you eat slowly and savor them.
               ORDER COFFEE OR TEA AFTER THE MEAL
            RATHER THAN DESSERT. Wansink notes that the
            relaxing atmosphere of a candlelit restaurant can make
            a meal more pleasant but can also lead people to
            spend a longer time at the table—and to eat more.91
            His suggestion: linger over a cup of co ee rather than a
            high-calorie dessert.
Do You Lack the Time to Prepare Healthy Meals?
Time pressures from work and family can make us all feel
strapped, and lack of time for meal preparation is seen as a barrier
to healthy eating.92 But with careful planning, healthy eating does


not need to take any more time than going out for takeout or
popping a frozen pizza into the oven. Consider these tips:
               DIVVY UP THE DINNERTIME DUTIES. Involve
            family members or roommates in meal preparation;
            even young children can help. If you live alone,
            consider creating a healthy lunch or dinner swap with
            four of your friends or colleagues at work: Assign
            everyone to make a quintuple-size batch of a healthy
            entrée over the weekend, and divide the batches into
            portable containers. On Monday, bring them in and
            swap, and you will each have enough lunches or
            dinners for the week.
               BE REALLY CAREFUL ABOUT CONVENIENCE
            FOODS. You may turn to convenience foods to shave
            some time o meal preparation, but they can have
            their drawbacks. Some processed foods are loaded with
            added salt or sugar or are high in unhealthy fats. Look
            for frozen entrées that have less than 300 milligrams
            sodium, less than two grams of saturated fat, and zero
            grams trans fat and that o er at least a few grams of
              ber per serving; add fresh fruit or a salad to round out
            the meal. Or make your own convenience “health”
            foods: cook up a large batch of whole grains, dried
            beans, or roasted vegetables on Sunday and use them at
            meals throughout the week or freeze them in small
            portions so that you can grab one for an easy lunch or
            dinner.
Do You Eat More on the Weekends Than During the Week?
Weekends are a time for relaxing, socializing, and, for many of us,
overeating—and these small indulgences may lead dieters to gain
weight or slow their weight loss. The National Weight Control
Registry has found that people who stick to the same eating
patterns on the weekends, on holidays, or on vacations as they do


during the week tend to be more successful at maintaining their
weight loss.93
  If you nd yourself falling away from your healthy eating
intentions on the weekends, consider these suggestions to keep you
on track:
               KEEP A FOOD DIARY. Research suggests that people
            who keep track of what they eat may be more
            successful at weight loss and at avoiding weight regain,
            since self-monitoring is a key element of self-
            regulation.94 Jot down everything you eat and drink on
            your calendar, your smart phone, or one of several Web
            sites that o er free online food logs. You could even try
            taking a digital photo of what you eat: a picture is
            worth a thousand words, and there’s evidence that
            taking pictures of what you eat may make you more
            aware of your food choices.95 Don’t agonize over the
            food-diary details; keeping the entries short may be just
            as effective for weight loss.96
               PLAN FOR MEALS WHEN YOU ARE ON THE GO. If
            you will be out running errands all day, pack healthy
            snacks in a cooler and take time for a mindful lunch
            break. If you will be eating lunch at a chain restaurant,
            scan the restaurant’s Web site before you head out;
            most have nutrition information available that can help
            you pick the most healthful choices.
               MAKE YOUR SOCIAL TIME ACTIVE TIME, NOT
            EATING TIME. Rather than meeting a friend for a
            sugar-laden co eehouse drink, meet for a brisk walk.
            Or go out dancing on a Saturday night instead of going
            out for dinner. (For more ideas on how to get active,
            see chapter 6.)
Do You Eat When You Are Angry, Sad, Bored, or Stressed?


The relationship between food and emotions is a complicated one.
At one end of the spectrum is someone who has a stressful day at
work and nds comfort in a candy bar on the way home. At the
other end is someone who struggles with anorexia, bulimia, binge
eating, or another type of disordered eating. Stress as well as several
emotions may prompt someone to turn to food for comfort—among
them anger, anxiety, boredom, loneliness, and sadness.97 There are
a variety of techniques for changing your behavior or changing your
thought process to cope with emotional eating.98 If you are
concerned that emotional eating may be derailing your attempts at
healthy eating, consider these tips to help you avoid using food to
manage your feelings:
              USE MINDFULNESS TO RECOGNIZE THE
           DIFFERENCE BETWEEN PHYSICAL AND EMOTIONAL
           HUNGER. Before going to the refrigerator or heading to
           the snack-food aisle of the supermarket, stop, take a
           slow, deep in-breath, and on the out-breath ask
           yourself this question: am I truly hungry, or do I crave
           these comfort foods to ease my stress or relieve another
           emotion? If you keep a food diary, jotting down your
           mood and your level of hunger when you eat may help
           you identify if and when your emotions are leading you
           to overeat.
              SEEK ALTERNATIVE WAYS TO COPE WITH STRESS
           AND EMOTIONS. Walking, yoga, mindfulness
           meditation, singing along with your MP3 player,
           gardening, taking an herb-scented bath, having a phone
           conversation with a friend—these are just some of the
           many activities you can choose to help ease stress and
           provide a food-free alternative for channeling your
           emotions.
              KEEP TEMPTING FOODS AWAY FROM YOUR HIGH-
           STRESS ZONES. If you are under a lot of pressure at
           work, replace the candy jar on your desk with a


           squeeze stress ball or a desktop Zen fountain.
             CONSULT WITH A PROFESSIONAL WHO
           SPECIALIZES IN EMOTIONAL EATING. If you can’t
           curtail your emotional eating on your own, you may
           want to nd a psychiatrist or therapist who specializes
           in food-mood issues. Your doctor or your employee-
           assistance program at work can likely provide a
           referral. The National Eating Disorders Association has
           a toll-free information number as well as a directory of
           providers and support groups on its Web site:
           //http://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/get-help-
           today/.
Translating Knowledge to Action: Your In Eating Strategy
We have given you a menu of options for making healthy changes
to your daily diet. We have reviewed the best food choices for
health, the common barriers to healthy eating, and, so that you can
truly savor your food, the connection between mindfulness and
eating. Now it is time to put it all together and create a practical
strategy that allows you to enjoy mindfulness at every meal—and to
move closer to your goal of achieving a healthier weight. We call it
your in Eating strategy, where the in means being in the present
moment. With your in Eating strategy, you will be able to set goals
for mindful, healthy eating and mindfully avoiding overeating,
  gure out ways around any barriers that might keep you from
reaching your goals, and lay out the steps you will take to reach
your goals. This inEating strategy will be incorporated into your
comprehensive Mindful Living Plan in chapter 7.
   As we have discussed, mindful eating encompasses what we eat
as well as how we eat—habits that are deeply ingrained and that
require dedicated e ort to change. While there are many possible
changes you can make on either of these dimensions of mindful
eating, only you can decide which changes are the most important
to you and the most doable. To help you identify your inEating


goals, what will help you reach them, and the barriers you may
face, re ect on the series of questions that follow. Journaling may
help you as you consider your responses and chart your strategy.
   Use your re ections to choose the goals that are most important
and doable for you, and create your own inEating practice, like the
example in table 7.1. Once you are successful at changing one habit,
build on your success to make other healthy changes. Keeping a log
of your inEating progress may help you better achieve your goals.
   Like all action plans, the inEating strategy is not meant to be a
static document. As you gain experience with healthy, mindful
eating and work through barriers, your goals and tips for
overcoming barriers may change. Bear in mind the impermanent
nature of all we do. Don’t be afraid to adjust things, as long as you
make sure you stay committed to and working toward your
ultimate goal: choosing healthy, delicious foods at every meal,
making every bite a mindful bite, and losing weight and keeping it
off.
Why do you want to eat more healthfully and mindfully?
   Think about the reasons you want to make healthier food choices
and choose smaller portion sizes. And think about all the reasons
you want to bring mindfulness to your meals. They can cut across
all parts of your life. It would be useful to write these reasons down
in a journal so that you can reflect on them later.
   Examples: I want to feel better about myself. I want to lose
weight. I want to lower my bad cholesterol. I want to lower my risk
of diabetes. I want to lower the carbon footprint of my food
choices. I want to slow down so I can truly savor my food.
What’s bad about eating foods that are unhealthy for you or for the
planet, eating too much, or eating mindlessly?
   Think about the downsides of choosing unhealthy foods—for
your own health and for the environment—and the downsides of


eating more food than your body needs for nourishment. Think
about the downsides of not paying attention to the act of eating or
of ignoring the full implications of your food choices. Again, they
can cut across all parts of your life.
   Examples: I’ll stay heavy. I won’t feel good about myself. I’ll see
my cholesterol go up. I’ll be wasting money and the planet’s
resources by eating more food than I need.
What healthy foods do you like? What healthy foods would you be
willing to try? What mindful eating practices would you be willing
to try?
   Think about the healthy foods that give you joy. Think about the
healthy foods that you do not currently eat but could consider
adding to your meals. Write down those foods and the reasons that
you want to make them a part of your meals. Then, think about all
the practices of mindful eaters, which of those practices you would
like to incorporate, and why.
   Food examples: Dark leafy greens, since they will give my bones
calcium and vitamin K. Plant proteins like walnuts and lentils, since
they are better for the planet and have bene cial nutrients for my
body. Brightly colored fruits such as strawberries and blueberries,
because their natural sweetness will satisfy my sweet tooth without
sending my blood sugar soaring.
   Mindful eating practice examples: Focusing on my food will give
me greater enjoyment during my meals. Choosing smaller portions
will be better for the planet and will also help me curb my daily
calorie intake.
What are some of the unhealthy foods that you could trade for
healthier foods? What are some of the unmindful habits that you
could most easily leave behind?
   Think about the foods you eat that your body does not require for
nourishment and that may actually harm your health—sugary
drinks, re ned grains, processed meats, salty snacks. Write down
these foods and how you could trade them for healthier foods.


Think about the habits you have that do not serve your desire to be
fully present during the act of eating.
  Food trade examples: I can choose unsweetened iced tea instead
of soda pop. I can snack on crunchy vegetables instead of chips. I
can buy wholewheat pasta instead of white pasta. I can drizzle olive
oil on my vegetables instead of butter.
  Mindful eating habit examples: I can have a silent cup of tea in
the morning instead of spending my break calling a friend on my
cell phone. I can tell my supervisor that I will be taking a full half
hour for lunch instead of scar ng down lunch at my desk, and then
make up that time later.
In what meal during the day would it be easiest for you to trade
healthy foods for unhealthy foods? In what meal during the day
would it be easiest for you to incorporate one or more of the seven
practices of a mindful eater?
  Your ultimate goal is to make every meal a healthy, mindful
meal. But for some people, it can be overwhelming to attempt to
change everything all at once. You may nd it easier to pick one
meal a day to start—perhaps the meal in which you have the most
control over your food choices, the most time to eat, or the fewest
distractions.
  Food examples: I can make healthy food trades at:
              breakfast, since it’s the one meal I eat at home every
           day
              lunch, because there’s a great salad bar in the
           cafeteria
              the food court, because the burrito shop o ers brown
           rice
              the gym, because I can ll my water bottle instead of
           buying an energy drink
              Sunday dinner, because I shop at the farm stand in


           the morning and cook a vegetarian dinner for the
           whole family
              evening snack, since I can eat fruit instead of cookies
   Mindful eating practice examples: I can incorporate a new
mindful eating practice at:
              breakfast, since I usually eat alone
              lunch, since there is a great vegetarian restaurant in
           the food court where I can use chopsticks and
           experiment with taking smaller bites
              dinner, since I can use a smaller plate to help myself
           choose smaller portions
What are two or three obstacles that can make it hard for you to
choose healthy foods and moderate portions? What are obstacles
that could make it hard for you to eat more mindfully? What are a
few ways around each of these?
   Finding your way around obstacles that get in the way of healthy
eating is a necessary and ongoing part of the process, and this is so
for everyone, from a professional nutritionist to a person just
starting out to make healthy choices. Think about some of the key
things that keep you from making healthy food choices or lead you
to overeat. They may be part of the list of barriers and habits we
went over earlier in this chapter, or they may be something else
entirely. Once you have the top two or three, write them down, and
then come up with ways you can get around them. This will be
your go-to list when things get tough and you are looking for
reasons to return to your old ways of eating.
   Examples:
             Obstacle: I don’t have enough time to eat breakfast.
             My solution: I’ll get my cereal and raisins ready on the counter
           the night before. Or I’ll get up fteen minutes earlier so that I have
           time to eat breakfast in the work cafeteria before going to my desk.


           Obstacle: I snack mindlessly while I watch television late into the
           night.
             My solution: I can track my TV time and make sure it’s less than
           one hour at night. I can make a pact with a friend to call each other
           with a turn-o -the-TV reminder at a preappointed time to
           encourage each other to get a good night’s rest; to help us consume
           programs more mindfully, my friend and I can also share about the
           program we just watched and discuss which seeds it watered in us.
           Before going to the fridge at night or opening a bag of chips, I can
           ask myself whether I am truly hungry. I can go to sleep earlier.
The Bottom Line
Mindful eating is a way to incorporate mindfulness into one of the
most fundamental activities of our existence. It is a way to nourish
our bodies and our minds. It is a way to help us achieve a healthier
weight, and a way to appreciate the relationship between the food
on our table, our health, and the health of the planet. It is a way to
grow our compassion for all living beings and imbue reverence for
life into every bite.
   For something so rich in positives, though, it’s not the easiest of
steps for us to take. Living as we all are in a society that spends so
much time and money to promote unhealthy foods and mindless
eating, and to limit access to healthy foods, it takes a dedicated,
mindful e ort to be able to focus on and choose the foods that are
best for our bodies and best for our planet. The steps described in
this chapter give you the tools you need to listen to your body, to
live in the moment, and to become a truly mindful, healthy eater.




CHAPTER 6
Mindful Moving
BEING ACTIVE IS ONE of life’s miracles. It lets us play with our
children, climb a mountain peak, or take a relaxing walk around
the neighborhood with our friends and family. It also helps us focus
our minds and get in touch with our senses, and it is one of the best
and easiest ways to practice mindfulness in our daily lives. The
systematic and deliberate nature of exercise—whether it’s walking
or running or doing yoga—grounds us in the moment and connects
us with our thoughts and what we’re seeing, hearing, and feeling.
Physical activity can become an anchor of mindfulness in our day,
and it’s also one of best paths toward weight loss.
THAT’S THE GOOD NEWS. The hard news, which we all know, is
that it can be di cult to get the exercise we need to keep ourselves
healthy and to keep our weight in check. It can be so much easier
to stay on the couch than to lace up our shoes and get out the door
for a walk. Our minds can easily conjure up excuses, and if this
describes you, take heart that you are not alone: over half the adults
in the United States don’t get the minimum amount of physical
activity that they should.1
  But don’t despair. Our bodies yearn to be active. It’s what they
were made for. All we have to do is unleash that natural state of
activity that we all have in us and that has been locked away by the


automated, fast-paced, yet sedentary modern world in which we
live. For to not be active, to not explore our physical selves and our
connection with our senses, is to deny ourselves a treasure of well-
being and a chance for personal transcendence.
   As we have talked about in previous chapters, we live in a
frenzied world that is often so lled with outside stimuli that most
of our day is spent disconnected from our inner selves. We get lost
in e-mail, the Internet, BlackBerries, television, or jumping from
one social occasion to the next. Exercise, especially in mindfulness,
gives you a break from all this and puts you back in touch with
yourself and your senses. Let’s call it mindful moving.
   When we consume food, we are actually taking in energy and
storing it in our body physiologically. Much of the energy is to
support the essential physiological and chemical processes in the
body, but an important part of it is spent on moving our body
physically, mostly through the hard work of our muscles. When we
breathe, the medium is air; when we eat, the medium is food; and
when we move, the medium is energy. When we walk, our muscles
burn the stored energy and convert it into kinetic energy for our
limbs, allowing us to move. This energy exchange is a miracle of
life. When we look deeply into the nature of our physical energy,
we can see that its sources are the sun, the rain, the air, the earth,
and our food. Like conscious breathing and conscious eating,
conscious moving can also lead us to the realization that everything
is dependent on everything else.
   Mindful moving is not just exercise for the sake of exercise. It’s an
expression of our mindfulness practice that helps us touch the
peace within, treasure what we have, and take real steps toward
improving our health and well-being.
LET’S BEGIN THE MINDFUL-MOVING journey by taking a look at
the sound science that backs the links between physical activity,
health, and well-being. We will address questions such as: Why do I
need to stay active? What are the bene ts? How much physical


activity do I need each day? What are the best types of physical
activity for me?
Benefits of Exercise
When it comes to health and well-being, regular exercise is about as
close to a magic potion as you can get. In the U.S. 2008 Physical
Activity Guidelines for Americans, the list of the bene ts of exercise
is so lengthy that it takes up an entire page (see table 6.1).2
Evidence shows that regular activity lowers the risk for many
chronic conditions, including diabetes, heart disease, high blood
pressure, and unhealthy cholesterol, as well as osteoporosis and
certain cancers. It’s been shown to boost mood, improve quality of
life, and help people better deal with life’s stresses. It also helps
prevent weight gain and obesity and helps people maintain weight
loss. To top it all o , it’s also been shown to extend life span.
Really, the only thing that boosts health more than exercise is not
smoking.
   In addition to the many physical bene ts of exercise, studies have
shown that exercise has a profound impact on brain functioning,
even if the exercise doesn’t begin until later in life. Dr. Kenneth
Cooper—the father of aerobics—and his son Dr. Tyler Cooper write
in their book Start Strong, Finish Strong: Prescriptions for a Lifetime
of Great Health that individuals in their forties who walk briskly for
three hours a week can “stop the shrinkage of brain areas that are
related to memory and higher cognition.”3 They also explain that
exercise is associated with improvements in verbal memory and
attention.
Table 6.1 HEALTH BENEFITS ASSOCIATED WITH REGULAR
PHYSICAL ACTIVITY
                       Children and Adolescents
Strong evidence


        Improved cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness
        Improved bone health
        Improved cardiovascular and metabolic health biomarkers
        Favorable body composition
Moderate evidence
        Reduced symptoms of depression
                       Adults and Older Adults
Strong evidence
        Lower risk of early death
        Lower risk of coronary heart disease
        Lower risk of stroke
        Lower risk of high blood pressure
        Lower risk of adverse blood lipid profile
        Lower risk of type 2 diabetes
        Lower risk of metabolic syndrome
        Lower risk of colon cancer
        Lower risk of breast cancer
        Prevention of weight gain
        Weight loss, particularly when combined with reduced
        calorie intake
        Improved cardiorespiratory and muscular fitness
        Prevention of falls
        Reduced depression
        Better cognitive function (for older adults)
Moderate to strong evidence
        Better functional health (for older adults)
        Reduced abdominal obesity
Moderate evidence


         Lower risk of hip fracture
         Lower risk of lung cancer
         Lower risk of endometrial cancer
         Weight maintenance after weight loss
         Increased bone density
         Improved sleep quality
   Dr. John Ratey, author of the book Spark: The Revolutionary
New Science of Exercise and the Brain, also talks about the many
mental and emotional bene ts linked to regular physical activity.4
According to Ratey, exercise is key to enlarging brain cells, fostering
learning, and decreasing stress, anxiety, and depression. He also
states that exercise can help manage attention de cit disorders and
addictive behaviors as well as help women deal with a lot of the
unpleasant symptoms of menopause. Neural plasticity is an area of
active research focusing on ways to change the neural activities and
promote structural changes in the brain.5 In his book The Mindful
Brain, psychiatrist Dr. Daniel Siegel indicates that both aerobic
exercise and mindfulness practice can promote neural plasticity.6
   Most important for the topic at hand, regular activity is an
essential part of any weight-loss plan. A 2009 scienti c review of
over forty weight-loss studies found that regular activity by itself
could lead to weight loss if people do not match their energy
expenditure by eating more.7 When combined with less caloric
intake, the losses were even greater. And as you might expect, the
harder and longer people worked out, the more weight they lost.
So How Active Should I Be?
This is the common and challenging question for most of us with
busy schedules and no plans to try out for the Olympic marathon
team. Overall, the quick answer is that any activity is better than
none; and in general, the more active you are, the better. But you
don’t have to quit your day job and devote yourself solely to the
gym to see real bene ts. According to Dr. Kenneth Cooper, going


from no regular activity to walking two miles at a brisk pace ve
times per week can dramatically lower the risk of high blood
pressure and heart disease while helping to improve mental and
emotional health and manage stress.8 Increase the intensity by
choosing more vigorous activities, such as jogging, step aerobics, or
cycling, and you can get the same bene ts in just twenty minutes of
exercise three days a week.
   These levels of activity generally align with the U.S. federal
guidelines for optimizing health bene ts with exercise. It is
currently recommended that adults get two and a half hours a week
of moderate-intensity aerobic activity (such as brisk walking, water
aerobics, or ballroom dancing) or one hour and fteen minutes of
vigorous physical activity (such as jogging or running, swimming
laps, or jumping rope; see table 6.2).9 Adding more activity to the
daily routine will have bigger health payo s. For those looking for
more bene t, the guidelines recommend ve hours per week of
moderate-intensity aerobic activity or two and a half hours per
week of vigorous-intensity exercise. Plus, they strongly encourage
activities that strengthen our muscles, such as weight training,
pushups, and sit-ups at least two days a week.10
DoModerate Intensity n’t Forget Strength and Flexibility
While the main activities focused on weight control are things like
walking and jogging, it’s important not to forget strength and
  exibility exercises as well. And this is especially important as we
age. Together, strength and stretching exercises build muscle,
improve agility and balance, and help you avoid injury when
you’re doing your aerobic activities. You should do strength and
stretching exercises, in addition to aerobic activities (see table 6.3).
   Like most types of activities, you can make strength training as
complex or as simple as you’d like. At the most basic, you want to
do it two or three times per week, with rest days between each
session. Ideally, the exercises you do should work all the major
parts of your body. And whichever exercises you’re doing, you want


to do several repetitions of each. Typically, trainers recommend
eight to twelve repetitions for each exercise, but for some
individuals, as few as three repetitions or as many as twenty could
be appropriate. Some trainers may recommend doing two or three
sets of the exercises, but research suggests you can achieve similar
bene ts by doing just a single set of exercises—and you may be
more likely to stick to a shorter, single-set session.11
   If you join a gym, a trainer can get you started on an
individualized routine. If you work out at home, many books can
help you create a routine with items around the house. Or you can
buy a resistance band or similar device and follow the simple
routines that come with the instructions.
   Flexibility training should be done more often than strength
training. Do it most days of the week, even every day. And it
doesn’t really take too long. Always warm up a bit beforehand;
then run through a series of stretches that cover all the major parts
of your body. Again, many books or Internet sites can help guide
you. Mindful Movements: Ten Exercise for Well-Being, by Thich
Nhat Hanh, may be particularly helpful, as it combines activities
that focus on strength, flexibility, agility, and mindfulness.12
   If you’re looking for something more formal or something you
can do with a group outside the house, tai chi, yoga, Pilates, or an
aerobics class that includes stretching as part of the warm-up or
cool-down are good alternatives as well.13
   Supershort bouts of exercise done throughout the day—say,
multiple ten-to fteen-minute exercise sessions—can be a good way
to t exercise into the daily routine, especially when you’re just
starting out. Though combining short bouts together may not be the
best path toward weight loss, it may help prevent weight gain.14
The important thing is simply to get moving regularly. If this means
stringing together short bouts of activity throughout the day, then
that’s what you should do, and there’s evidence that it has many
benefits.15


Exercise Recommendations for Losing Weight
For people who are overweight, recommended amounts of activity
reach a bit beyond those for people who are just looking to
improve their health. The 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for
Americans suggests that most people who want to lose weight need
to get at least five hours of moderate physical activity each week.
  This may sound like a lot, especially if you are not currently
getting much exercise. Take heart: these levels don’t need to be
reached overnight. You should build up slowly, starting with an
initial goal of two and a half hours each week and nishing at ve
hours or more each week. It can seem daunting at rst, but building
up slowly helps you get into a routine, and before you know it
you’ll feel like something is missing from your day when you don’t
get your exercise in.
  Although there’s some debate about whether exercise alone can
achieve signi cant weight loss in people—with some researchers
concluding that it can16 and others concluding that it can’t17—one
thing is clear: the most e ective way to lose weight is by combining
increased activity with a healthy diet that cuts back on calories. The
American College of Sports Medicine (ACSM) recommends that
people trying to lose weight increase their activity and cut back on
calories so that they create an overall calorie de cit of about ve
hundred to one thousand calories a day.18 This would translate to
losing one to two pounds a week. What does this mean to real
people? It’s really pretty simple. To create an overall calorie de cit
of ve hundred calories in a day, you can burn about three hundred
calories more than usual by walking about three miles (one mile
generally equals one hundred calories) and cut back on what you
eat by about two hundred calories by skipping a bag of chips or a
bottle of sugar-sweetened soda.
  Of course, you can do other combinations. And to get up to one
thousand calories a day de cit, you just increase both sides of the
equation: get more activity and cut back on more calories. However
you do it, it’s important to be sensible. Weight loss isn’t a sprint; it’s


a continuous journey. So while you need to make deliberate
changes that make a di erence, you also need make sure they are
changes you can maintain over the long term. You don’t want to
start out your rst week by going to the gym for three hours a day
only to get burned out and not go back for two years. Take it
slowly. Gradually increase your activity and shave o a few junk-
food calories to achieve your sensible goal of a ve-hundred-to-one-
thousand-calorie de cit per day, and keep it there.19 Though the
pounds won’t melt o like magic in the rst few days, you can feel
con dent that they will drop o , and by doing things the right way,
they’ll be much more likely to stay off in the long term.
   The ACSM guidelines encourage those trying to lose weight to
strive for an initial goal of 150 minutes (2.5 hours) of moderate-
intensity exercise (such as brisk walking, ballroom dancing,
bicycling) each week or 20 minutes of vigorous-intensity exercise
(such as jogging, aerobic dancing, singles tennis, jumping rope, or
swimming laps) three times per week, which is similar to the
recommendations of the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for
Americans for optimizing health bene ts. After reaching and
maintaining this amount of exercise, individuals should increase
their energy expenditure to at least 200 to 300 minutes of exercise
per week. This is the equivalent of 40 to 60 minutes a day in one
or multiple segments, five days a week.
Keeping It Off
Of course, just as important as taking o the weight is keeping it
o . And regular physical activity continues to be a key ingredient in
weight maintenance. Both the 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines and
the ACSM guidelines recommend two to three hundred minutes of
activity per week to keep weight o over the long term. Some
evidence points to even more. Data from the National Weight
Control Registry, which tracks nearly four thousand people who
have lost signi cant amounts of weight, found that people are most
successful at keeping the pounds o if they regularly got sixty to


seventy- ve minutes per day of moderate-intensity activity like
brisk walking, or thirty- ve to forty minutes per day of more
vigorous activity such as jogging.20 These are average amounts of
activity, and there was quite a bit of variability in the amount of
activity required; some people needed more activity to stay at a
healthy weight, and some required less. It’s very individualized, and
you’ll need to determine this for yourself. If you’re eating the same
amount of food and your weight is creeping up, you may need to
exercise more.
Table 6.2 EXAMPLES OF DIFFERENT AEROBIC PHYSICAL
ACTIVITIES AND INTENSITIES
Source: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans
(Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008).
Television, Weight, and Health
For many of us, television has become a daily companion. It keeps


us informed about happenings across town and around the globe. It
alerts us about severe weather and other breaking events. And it’s
generally considered a source of entertainment and relaxation.
    Unfortunately, a lot of us have taken TV watching to the extreme,
letting it become a huge part of our daily lives. According to
Nielsen Media, the average American watched four hours and forty-
nine minutes of television each day during the 2008–2009 season,
and current trends suggest that this number will continue to rise
each year.21 Kids spend more time watching television and playing
on computers each year than they do in school, and the weekly
screen time for adults is getting close to the equivalent of a full-time
job.
    Table 6.3 HOW ACTIVE SHOULD I BE?
Sources: American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines for Exercise Testing and Prescription
(Philadelphia: Lippincott Williams & Wilkins, 2006); J. E. Donnelly et al., American College of Sports
Medicine position stand: Appropriate physical activity intervention strategies for weight loss and prevention
of weight regain for adults, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 41 (2009): 459–71; U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines for Americans (Washington, DC: U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services, 2008).
    It’s understandable how this happens. Companies spend billions
of dollars to entice you to watch their shows and their ads so you
will buy their products and then come back and watch even more


ads. And they’re all very good at their jobs. But as we let ourselves
and our kids get caught up in this vicious cycle of watching and
buying, our mental and physical health suffers.
   As mentioned in chapter 1, time spent watching television ties
directly to rates of obesity. Studies have shown that men who
watched three or more hours of television per day, and women
who watched four or more hours of television per day, were two
times more likely to be obese than those who watched less than
one hour a day.22 The large-scale and long-running Nurses’ Health
Study has shown that the risk of obesity in women increased by
nearly 25 percent for each two-hour block of time women spent
watching TV each day.23 Even those who were very physically
active couldn’t fully escape the obesity risk linked to large amounts
of television viewing.
   And the downsides of television viewing don’t stop just at weight
gain. It’s an equal-opportunity hazard that has also been found to
increase the risk of diabetes, as well as heart disease risk factors
such as high blood glucose, high blood pressure, high triglycerides,
and low HDL (“good”) blood cholesterol.24
   So how is it that television can be so bad for you, even in those
who are physically active overall? There are several possible
reasons. Time spent watching television is time you’re not spending
being active, even if it’s just padding around the house doing
various things. This means you burn fewer calories, which can lead
to weight gain and a host of unhealthy risk factors. In addition,
some researchers posit that television watching is strongly
associated with mindless consumption of unhealthy high-calorie
snacks and beverages, since many people tend to snack while
watching television. A good example is a 2006 study that found that
subjects who watched television ate signi cantly more food than
did a similar group who listened to classical music.25 Taking this
idea a step further, researchers suspect that the food ads on
television increase consumption not only while people are in front
of the TV but also throughout the day. And there is some good


evidence to back this up. One study showed that those who
watched the most television were more likely to eat dinner at fast-
food restaurants.26 And another study showed that those who
watched two or more hours of television per day had the highest
intake of calories, while those who watched less than an hour had
the lowest.27
   The result of this sedentary lifestyle and an increased intake of
often-unhealthy calories is a toxic mix that not only promotes
weight gain but also increases risk factors for heart disease,
diabetes, and stroke.
   Because of all this, it’s important to be mindful about how much
television you watch. Most recommendations say that adults and
children shouldn’t get any more than two hours a day. And the
closer you can get this gure to zero, the better. This can be hard to
do for many of us, but this is where practicing mindfulness can be
helpful in changing our television-viewing habits.
Television-Viewing Meditation
When you nd yourself reaching for the television remote control,
stop and take a few in-breaths and out-breaths.
           Breathing in, the remote control is in my hand.
           Breathing out, why am I watching television?
   By pausing and breathing, you are breaking your ingrained
autopilot habit of watching television whenever you are tired,
bored, feeling restless, or wanting to relax. Breathing in and out
mindfully helps you reconnect to your current state of feelings and
thoughts. Being mindful helps you be in touch with what is really
helpful to cope with the particular physical or emotional state you
are in. You may then realize that television is not the antidote for
your current state of body or mind. If you are tired, the images and
sounds from television stimulate your senses more instead of
helping you relax and rest. Just breathing in and out helps you
realize that a wiser solution to your tiredness is to lie down in a


comfortable position, close your eyes, and focus on your breath to
allow your body to calm down and truly rest. Or if you are feeling
blue, by being mindful you realize that it is better to call your good
friend to chat about what is bothering you than allow the sights and
sounds of television to camou age an emotion that needs your care.
We invite you to explore appendix D, which o ers more than fty
creative alternatives to television watching, many of which involve
physical activity.
Barriers and Challenges That Prevent Physical Activity
Now that we have covered some of the bene ts of activity and how
much we need it to stay healthy and keep our weight in check, it’s
time to gure out how to actually make that happen. For a few
people, it’s as easy as deciding to be more active, buying a good
pair of walking shoes, and just getting out the door to a new, active
life. For most of us, though, it’s a bit harder than that. There are a
lot of things in life that can keep us from getting the activity we
need. They can be mental barriers, physical barriers, social barriers,
or any manner of things that work against our getting out that door
for a workout.
   For our health and happiness we need to figure out a way around
these barriers and carve out a permanent space in our lives for
activity. Once you do this, before you know it, activity will become
an indispensable part of your daily routine that keeps you on the
path of fitness, good health, and mindfulness.
   If you asked most people whether being more physically active
would be good for their health and mental well-being, almost all
would say yes, yet according to the latest data, more than half of all
adults in the United States don’t get enough physical activity, and
25 percent don’t exercise at all.28 There are a lot of reasons for this
disconnect between knowledge and action, some that exist within
ourselves and some that exist outside ourselves. With the rare
exception, though, we can navigate around and over most such
barriers and find our way to a more active life.


   What makes active people active and sedentary people
sedentary? Many studies have sought to answer that question, and
the ndings may not come as much of a surprise: People are more
likely to be active if they believe they’ll be successful at it—that
they’ll be able to do it regularly, they won’t be too tired, they’ll be
able to do it without feeling bad or embarrassed.29 People are more
likely to be active if they believe they’ll get bene ts from it—that
they’ll feel better, they’ll lose weight, they’ll lower their risk of
heart disease.30 People are more likely to be active if their physical
and social environment supports an active lifestyle—if they live in
safe neighborhoods, have access to parks and walking paths, and
have family and friends who encourage them.31
   The ip sides of these positive forces that make it easier for
people to be active are the barriers that can keep us from being
active. Leading the list for most of us: lack of time. But myriad
other obstacles can stand in the way of becoming more active, like
fear of not meeting our exercise goals, fear of being injured, fear of
being made fun of, not having enough money for the right
equipment or gym membership, or simply disliking exercise.
   These are all valid concerns. But with a little creativity and
forethought, you don’t need to give up on your active-living journey
before it starts. How can you overcome these barriers? You simply
need to make a plan. Figure out what you want to do and how you
are going to get there. Even the person for whom it seems exercise
comes as second nature has to work all the time to overcome
barriers to staying active.
   The cornerstone of any plan is commitment: commitment to
being active, commitment to losing weight, and commitment to the
plan itself. While this sounds a bit stark, it’s really not. Our lives are
dynamic entities: our schedules change, our attitudes change, our
relationships develop. So any plan has to be exible enough to
work through all of these factors, and more. But your commitment
to the goal of being more active—and the goal of nding a way to
become more active—is essential. And it’s easier than you think,
although it doesn’t happen overnight.


    Be warned that whenever you try to adopt a new habit, it is
natural to backslide a bit. If you nd that you have fallen away
from your exercise plan for a day, a week, even a month, do not
judge yourself harshly as a failure. Just start again. Every day is a
new day, an opportunity for a new beginning. You can begin anew
every moment. Start small, with baby steps, and before you know it
activity will be as much a part of your life as sleeping and brushing
your teeth.
    Now, let’s address some of the more common barriers people
have when it comes to being more active, and the steps you can
take to overcome them.
“I Just Don’t Have Time”
If there were an award given for the most common issue that keeps
people from exercising, the hands-down winner would be: “I just
don’t have time.” And it’s certainly a valid issue. People have busy
schedules—work, family, household chores, soccer games, school
recitals, book clubs, and more. Time is precious and hard to come
by. But this doesn’t mean you can’t carve out space for regular
activity, especially when you think about the health boost you will
get and how it will help you maintain your healthy weight. Try to
make exercise as essential a daily routine as eating or sleeping. It
may be tough to t it in at rst, but after a while the day just won’t
seem complete unless you’ve had your exercise. You’ll miss the
renewal and joy you get from exercising.
    Consider the following ways to work around this barrier:
        WAKE UP EARLY. When the day gets rolling up to full steam,
        it can be hard to find the time to exercise. Wake up early and
        do yoga in your living room, head out the door for a brisk
        walk to enjoy the fresh morning air, or head to the gym
        before others in the house are up needing your help or
        company.
        ENERGIZE YOUR LUNCH. After mindfully eating your lunch,
        gather some friends and head for a walk before you have to


       head back to work or your chores. Even a fifteen-minute walk
       after lunch helps reenergize you during midday.
       GET YOUR WORKOUT CLOTHES AND SHOES TOGETHER
       THE NIGHT BEFORE. This way you’ll be packed and ready to
       go—either in the morning for an early workout or later in the
       day when a workout window opens.
       FIT IN SOME EXERCISE HERE, SOME EXERCISE THERE. If
       you just can’t fit in one solid block of exercise, try stringing
       together a few smaller bouts: a twenty-minute walk first thing
       in the morning; a twenty-five-minute walk at lunch; and a
       fifteen-minute walk home from the store after work. Together,
       you’ve reached sixty minutes for the day.
       FIND THE PHYSICAL ACTIVITIES THAT YOU ENJOY.
       Explore different types of physical activities—bicycling,
       dancing, Frisbee, hiking, table tennis, swimming, tai chi, rock
       climbing, golf, yoga, and more. Find what you really enjoy.
       It’s easier to stick to a physical activity routine when you have
       fun doing it.
“I’m Too Tired”
Don’t let the “tired” excuse drag you down. It’s an easy one to use,
and one we can all relate to. Our lives are lled with many, many
responsibilities that take up a lot of our energy, and when we
  nally nd a spare moment to ourselves we often want to put our
feet up and relax rather than lace up our shoes and get out the door
for a walk.
   And, of course, there are times when we’re just so tired that
there’s nothing we can do but crawl into bed when we have the
chance. But when you think about it and examine how you are
feeling right in the moment, you will come to realize that these
times are very rare. In most cases, getting some exercise is just what
we need to clear our minds of the day’s problems, make us feel
empowered, and give us a boost of energy to get us through the rest
of the day.
   Consider these ways to work around this barrier:


        EXERCISE DURING YOUR MOST ENERGIZED PART OF THE
        DAY. We all have parts of the day where we feel better than
        others. Some people are morning people. Some people are
        evening people. Some people like midday. Whichever you
        are, try to schedule your workout during that part of the day
        when you usually feel your best.
        TURN OFF THE TELEVISION. Nothing saps one’s energy like
        television. Whether it’s a good show or bad show, once you sit
        down in front of the television you are much less likely to get
        up and go get the exercise you need. So, before you decide to
        sit down and watch your favorite shows, get out the door for a
        brisk walk, ride your bike, or shoot a few baskets. Perhaps
        you will be so invigorated from your workout that you’ll
        decide to do something else that you really need to do with
        your time instead of watching television.
        SCHEDULE WORKOUTS WITH FRIENDS. Nothing helps keep
        your workouts on track—even when you’re tired—like
        support from your peers. Get a group of friends together, and
        set a regular time to meet them for a trip to the gym or a
        good jog. They’ll keep you honest—not letting you off too
        often for being too tired to work out—and you’ll be doing the
        same for them.
        KEEP AN EXERCISE LOG. Whether you do it online or in a
        notebook, keeping a log of your workouts can be a great way
        to motivate yourself and get yourself out the door. You’ll be
        amazed at how easily you’ll wave off your fatigue and just get
        out of the door when you’re faced with entering zero minutes
        of workout time for a whole day.
“I Don’t Want to Look Silly”
Almost anyone who’s ever been to a gym has felt awkward
compared with the tness bu s at the weight machines, with their
toned triceps and lean physiques. It’s only natural, especially for
many people who are overweight or don’t feel comfortable with
their bodies. But there’s no reason to let these feelings stop you.


Your health and your weight are important priorities, not what
people may or may not be thinking about you. This is another
opportunity to practice mindfulness by fully immersing yourself in
the present moment without judgment. Focus on your body and the
workout, the movement of your arms and limbs—not the people
around you. And the more you exercise, the more time you spend
at the gym or jogging on the bike path, the more comfortable you’ll
feel.
    Consider these ways to work around this barrier:
        WORK OUT AT HOME AT FIRST. If you really feel self-
        conscious about working out in public, find an exercise video
        or exercise show that you like, and follow along in the
        comfort of your own living room. This will help you feel
        more confident and competent and show you that you deserve
        to be outside on the paths or in the gyms just like everybody
        else.
        SCHEDULE AN APPOINTMENT WITH A TRAINER. Most
        gyms offer free or low-cost sessions with a trainer for those
        just starting out. A trainer can show you how the machines
        work and help you create a training plan that is personalized
        to your own conditions and goals. This will take away some
        of the mystery and build up your confidence.
    If you continue to feel that you have an image problem, you may
want to seek the help of a professional psychotherapist or
psychologist specializing in body image. The government Web site
health nder.gov has links to several Web sites that o er
information and professional referrals on body image and eating
disorders.
“It’s Too Much; I Don’t Know Where to Start”
It’s easy to feel overwhelmed by these negative thoughts: “I have
tried so many times in my life to lose weight, eat right, and exercise
more, and I am not getting anywhere.” Living with mindfulness


means that you are not dwelling on your past. The past is already
gone. You have the power to not repeat the past habits that did not
work for you. You have the choice to follow a di erent path, a
di erent way of living that is aligned with your intention. By now,
chances are that you already have a good picture of why you failed
with all your previous attempts. Take a few deep breaths, relax,
and know that you don’t have to do everything at once. A small
change here and there builds up over time.
  Consider this suggestion:
      MAKE PROGRESSIVE GOALS, AND KEEP TRACK OF YOUR
      PROGRESS. You need to start somewhere, so the best thing to
      do early in your journey is to set an achievable goal and then
      build from there. If your ultimate goal is to walk ten thousand
      steps per day, make your first goal three thousand steps per
      day. Keep track of your progress every day, recording how
      many steps you’ve taken in your exercise log, and once you
      have met that goal and maintained it for little while, increase
      your goal to six thousand steps per day and build up again.
      You can keep track of your goals and progress by using a
      notebook and pen, or one of the many online tools—
      whichever you like best. The important thing is being
      consistent with your activity and your tracking.
“Working Out Is Too Expensive”
Just as you don’t need to run marathons to bene t from exercise,
you don’t need to spend thousands of dollars on clothes,
equipment, and gym memberships to get the exercise you need.
When it comes down to it, the only thing you really, really need is a
good pair of walking or running shoes.
  Consider these ways to work around this barrier:
      EXPLORE THE YMCA OR COMMUNITY CENTERS. Although
      you don’t need a health-club membership to get the exercise
      you need, it can be nice to have access to workout equipment,


       classes, and trainers. Some clubs can be incredibly expensive,
       but there are a lot of them that aren’t. YMCAs are generally
       very reasonably priced, as are community-center gyms, and
       often these facilities offer a sliding pay scale depending on
       how much people can afford.
       INVEST IN YOUR SHOES. You can spend thousands of dollars
       on exercise clothes and equipment, but really, you don’t need
       them. Comfortable, sweat-wicking clothes can be nice, but
       these don’t have to be expensive, and you don’t need a
       different outfit for every day of the month. What you really
       can’t skimp on are walking/running shoes. They support your
       feet and help keep your joints happy. Check with your
       network of friends or colleagues at work to figure out which
       ones will give you the best value for the support you need for
       your exercise routine.
“There’s No Place to Exercise in My Neighborhood”
This is a problem we have all dealt with at some point in our lives,
maybe for all of our lives: lack of sidewalks or open spaces; no
health clubs close enough to home. It’s hard to get a good workout
if there’s simply no place nearby to exercise. Yet there are ways to
overcome this barrier.
   Consider these suggestions:
       WORK OUT AT HOME. It may not be your first choice, but
       working out in your living room or bedroom can be just as
       good as doing it outside. It just takes a bit more planning and
       the right type of equipment—whether it’s an exercise bike,
       treadmill, or good step-aerobics video. In fact, research has
       shown that having access to home exercise equipment can
       actually help boost the amount of exercise we get.32
       PLAN WORKOUTS AWAY. If there are good places to exercise
       away from your neighborhood—whether at work, school, or a
       friend’s place—plan a little extra time and get in a walk or
       jog early in the day or before you head home.


      WORK WITH YOUR COMMUNITY TO GET TRAILS AND
      PATHS BUILT. This is a long-term process, not a quick fix to
      your problem of finding a place to be physically active. But
      we can all work to make our communities healthier. It can be
      as easy as sending an e-mail or talking to your local legislator,
      or as involved as organizing a presentation to the city council.
      Whatever you can do, it’s a great move that will benefit not
      only you but also your loved ones and everyone else in the
      community.
“My Neighborhood’s Just Not Safe”
The unfortunate reality is that we sometimes live in neighborhoods
that just aren’t that safe, and this can be a big barrier to getting the
exercise we need. Not only does it cut down on our opportunities
to be active; it also saps our energy as we try to gure out ways
around it, all the while thinking about our safety and the safety of
our loved ones.
  Consider these ways to work around this barrier:
      FIND A SAFE INDOOR AREA TO EXERCISE. This can be your
      home, a community center, or a local YMCA. Just find which
      one, or which combination, works best for you. Videos or TV
      fitness shows can get you moving at home, and community
      centers, YMCAs, and other types of gyms can offer access to
      exercise equipment and regular exercise classes.
      EXERCISE WITH A GROUP. There actually is safety in
      numbers. Find some folks with goals similar to yours, and get
      outside for walks or jogs together a few days a week. Not only
      will you feel safer; you’ll be more motivated to get out there,
      since your group will be depending on you. You can make a
      commitment to others to exercise regularly with them. Join a
      dance, aerobics, or martial-arts class. It may be easier to stay
      motivated and interested in our exercise if we do it in a group
      setting.
      GO WHERE YOU FEEL MORE COMFORTABLE. If you can, try


      to go to areas where you feel more comfortable to get your
      exercise. Maybe this is during lunch at school or work, using
      the stairways or the grounds nearby. Or you can make a
      special trip to somewhere beautiful just for a healthy change
      of pace.
“My Body Has Aches and Pains”
People who have chronic conditions such as osteoarthritis, high
blood pressure, or type 2 diabetes may worry that physical activity
would make their condition worse. The 2008 Physical Activity
Guidelines for Americans recommends regular physical activity to
promote quality of life and reduce the risk of developing other new
chronic conditions such as heart disease.33 It is essential, however,
that people with chronic conditions consult their health-care
providers about the type and amounts of activity that they should
routinely engage in, and get monitored by them regularly.
The Mindfulness Connection
Now that we have discussed the science behind the link between
exercise and health, and some of the nuts and bolts of tting
exercise into your life, it’s time to connect activity with the practice
of mindfulness—something that will make integrating activity into
your life that much easier and that much more meaningful.
   The journey toward weight loss is a journey of mind and body,
and in no place is this union more clear than in the act of exercise
and moving—mindful moving. When we are active—whether we’re
walking, climbing a mountain, or working in a garden—we are
bound to the moment, which is the essence of mindfulness. If we
weren’t really in the moment, we’d stumble, we’d lose our footing,
or we’d dig up the wrong plant. And by being in the moment we
connect more closely to our senses, to our meditative breathing, to
our bodies in general.
   All these connections ground us and help us transcend the daily
stresses, the daily barrage of commercials and other hurtful stimuli,


giving us the peace of mind and body that helps us lose the weight
we want, achieve the healthy life we need, and touch peace.
   There is no better demonstration of the power of mindfulness
than the walking meditation. Walking meditation is one of the ways
to contemplate peace. Walking generates the energy of peace,
solidity, and freedom.
Walking Meditation
               Take two or three steps for each in-breath and each out-breath.
               Breathing in, say, “I have arrived”; breathing out, say, “I am
                 home.”
               Breathing in, say, “In the here”; breathing out, say, “In the now.”
               Breathing in, say, “I am solid”; breathing out, say, “I am free.”
                 Breathing in, say, “In the ultimate”; breathing out, say, “I
                 dwell.”
   To start, when you breathe in slowly, take two or three steps.
Bring your attention to the soles of your feet, and become aware of
the contact between your feet and the ground. Bring all your
attention down to the soles of your feet.
   Breathing in, take two or three steps, and say with each step, “I
have arrived.”
   Breathing out, take another two or three steps, remaining mindful
of the contact between your feet and the ground, and say, with each
step, “I’m home.”
   But, arrived where? And where is home? you may ask.
   According to the teachings and practice of the Buddha, life is
available only in the present moment, in the here and now. And
when you go back to the present moment, you have a chance to
touch life, to encounter life, to become fully alive and fully present.
That is why every step brings us back to the present moment—so
that we can touch the wonders of life that are available. Therefore,
when you say, “I have arrived,” you’re saying, “I have arrived in the


here and now—the only place, the only time when life is available,
and this is my true home.” “I have arrived” means, “I don’t want to
be distracted and lost anymore, because I know that conditions for
my happiness are already here in the present moment.” Sometimes
we believe that happiness is not possible in the here and now, that
we need a few more conditions to be happy. So we run toward the
future to get the conditions we think are missing. But by doing so
we sacrifice the present moment; we sacrifice true life.
   In our daily life, we have a tendency to think about the past, to
get caught in sorrow and regret concerning the past, and to get
caught in fear and uncertainty about the future, so our mind is not
in the present moment. That is why it is very important to learn
how to go back to the present moment in order to become fully
alive, fully present. Walking meditation helps us do that easily.
WE NEED TO LEARN to walk in such a way that every step brings
us stability, freedom, healing, and transformation. In order for each
step to be solid, to be free, to be healing, to be nourishing, we need
the energy of mindfulness and concentration, which is obtained by
mindful breathing and mindful walking. “I have arrived. I am
home.” That is not a statement. That is a practice, and only you can
know whether you have arrived in the here and now; no one else
can tell you. If you are truly established in the here and now, you
feel free, light, and peaceful, and you can get in touch with all the
wonders of life that are available.
   Walk in such a way that peace becomes a reality in every cell of
your body, in every cell of your consciousness. When we breathe
peacefully, the peace of our breath penetrates into our body and
mind. Then very soon, in no time at all, body, mind, and breath
become one in concentration, and we get the energy of stability,
solidity, and freedom generated by every step we make.
   After a few minutes, you may move to the third line of the
meditation: “In the here. In the now.” It means I am at home in the
here and now. The address of the kingdom of God, the address of


peace and togetherness is the here and now, not in the past, not in
the future, and not in any other location in space.
   After some time, you might like to move to the fourth line: “I am
solid. I am free.” Solidity and freedom are the most important
aspects of happiness. Without some solidity, without some freedom,
true happiness is not possible; therefore, every step should be able
to generate more solidity and freedom. And again, this is not a wish
or a declaration. It is a practice.
   So, “I am solid, I am free” means I notice that now I am more
solid, I am freer. That makes the practice much more pleasant. You
walk with dignity, like a king or queen. You walk like a lion,
because you are truly yourself, with all your serenity and strength.
   Every step becomes a delight. Every step has the power to heal,
to transform. Not only can we heal ourselves with our steps, but we
can help heal our loved ones, friends, the earth, and the
environment. As we walk with mindfulness, we become calmer.
Our brain becomes clearer and more lucid, allowing solutions to
emerge to whatever pressing challenges we ourselves, our loved
ones, our friends, or our world face.
   The last line of the meditation is “In the ultimate I dwell.” There
are two dimensions to reality. The rst is the historical dimension,
and the second is the ultimate dimension. We have an ultimate
dimension—the ground of our being—and if we know how to live
deeply every moment of our historical dimension, we can touch our
ultimate dimension.
   The historical dimension can be likened to a wave. And the
ultimate dimension is like the water in a wave. A wave may seem
to have a beginning and an ending. A wave may be seen as high or
low, big or small, different from or similar to other waves.
   But the appearance of beginning and ending, high and low, more
or less beautiful, belongs only to the historical dimension. Because
the wave is at the same time the water. Water transcends the form
of the wave, and the idea of beginning and ending, high or low, this
wave or that wave. These notions apply to the wave but not to the


water. The moment when the wave realizes that she is water, she
loses all her fear and she enjoys much more being a wave. She is
free from birth and death, being and nonbeing, high or low,
because when we are able to touch our ultimate dimension, we are
no longer subjected to fear—fear of being less than or more than
other waves; fear of birth; fear of death.
   This is a very deep practice. When you touch your true
foundation, your true nature—the nature of no birth and no death—
then nonfear arises. And with nonfear, true happiness becomes
possible.
   It is possible to live each moment of our daily life in a way that
helps us touch our ultimate dimension. In fact, it is only through
living our daily life in the historical dimension deeply that we can
dwell in the ultimate.
     Touching the Sky and the Earth
       To develop concentration, physical stability, strength, and exibility, Thay
     regularly practices Ten Mindful Movements as described in the book Mindful
     Movements: Ten Exercises for Well-Being. They are simple movements based in
     yoga and tai chi. One of them is called Touching the Sky and the Earth.
       Your feet are hip-width apart with knees slightly bent. Breathing in, bring
     your arms up above your head, palms forward. Stretch all the way up, and
     look up as if you are trying to touch the sky. Breathing out, bend at the waist
     as you bring your arms down to touch the earth, or as far as you can
     comfortably reach. If your hands can touch the ground, feel your hands
     planted into the earth. Release your neck. From this position, breathe in, and
     keep your back relaxed as you come all the way back up and touch the sky.
     Touch the earth and sky three more times.34
     Mindful Stretching and Fidgeting
       Fidgeting is a good way to burn o excess calories throughout our waking
     hours. Research has shown that we can burn calories outside formal physical
     activity regimens. Fidgeting—the little movements that we make such as pacing


    as we talk, gesturing with our hands, standing instead of sitting—can burn as
    much as a few hundred calories a day.35 Instead of sitting down on a chair
    while you are talking on the phone or talking to someone, try pacing around
    instead. While waiting in line at the bank or grocery store, while waiting for
    the bus or sitting at a red light, you can mindfully stretch, pointing and flexing
    your feet or exing and relaxing your legs and arms. Or you can mindfully
    fidget by jiggling your limbs as you stay with your conscious breathing.
       Increasingly, we are spending more hours sitting in front of a computer
    screen. We communicate with others via e-mail and blogs; we search the Web,
    watch movies, work on our assignments; and so forth. Try setting your
    computer screen higher so that you can stand up while using the computer.
    This way, you can take regular breaks to stretch and use more of your muscles,
    burning more calories. As you stretch and move around, you can also prevent
    back pain and shoulder aches caused by sitting and typing for extended
    periods.
       Breathing in, I fidget and pace around.
       Breathing out, I prevent my body from stiffening/tensing up.
Mindful Moving with Other Activities
While mindful walking is the perfect way to begin the practice of
mindful moving, you certainly don’t need to limit yourself to
walking if you like other activities just as much, if not more.
Whether it’s cycling, dancing, running, gardening, or doing yoga,
you can apply the same meditative practice used in mindful
walking.
  If you’re riding your bike, every ten pedal strokes use a line from
the meditation along with your in and out breath: “I have arrived. I
am home.”
  If you’re working in a garden, every other time you dig with your
spade or pull a weed, breathe in and practice: “I am solid.” Breathe
out and practice: “I am free.”
  It may seem a bit forced and odd at rst, since most of us have
never approached activity with meditation in mind. But as you


practice, it will become an integral part of your activity, not only
helping you ground yourself in the present moment but making
exercise an experience you’ll enjoy like you never have before. It
will become a focal point of your day, when you’ll be able to
connect with the moment and connect with yourself, and it is
through this connection, and the dynamic nature of exercise and
movement, that you will be able to lose the weight you want to
lose and become the healthy person you want to be.
    Mindful Arm Swing
    A Movement to Help Untie Your External and Internal Knots
      This movement comes from the traditional Chinese chi qong practice. It is
    both releasing and invigorating. It can be done wherever you are. It does not
    require any equipment; your own body is the instrument. It is convenient,
    since you can do it anywhere, at any time, and it takes only five minutes.
            1. Stand with your feet at shoulder width; relax the body with the
                knees slightly bent.
            2. Have your eyes focused on an object or scenery in front of you.
            3. Swing your arms up straight in front of you toward the sky or
                ceiling, as you inhale deeply.
            4. Drop and swing your arms back down all the way and behind
                you, as you exhale completely.
            5. Repeat this up-and-down movement continually.
            6. Increase the speed of the up-and-down movement gradually
                throughout the exercise for five minutes.
      When doing this exercise, try to feel that you are “swimming” in air. You are
    one with the air, and you exchange energy with air. When you move the arms
    up and inhale, you are taking in fresh energy from all that is around you, and
    when you swing your arms down on the exhale, you expel all the burdensome
    energy. Every move is a mindful move, and every move is actively engaging
    with the air and your breath. You will instantly feel di erent after doing the
    arm swing for ve minutes continually. Your heart is pumping, and you feel
    happier. The tensions in your head and around your shoulders and back


    muscles start to release and relax. The movement together with the breathing
    will take you back to yourself, uniting body and mind. If you have back
    problems or other physical concerns, please consult your health-care provider
    before starting this exercise.
Putting It All Together
We have covered a lot of ground in this chapter: the health and
weight-loss bene ts of exercise; the amount of exercise needed to
lose weight and keep it o ; the important connection between
mindfulness and activity; and the common barriers to getting the
exercise we need. Now it is time to put it all together and create a
plan for our active selves. Let’s call it your inMoving Plan—where
in conveys being in the present moment. With your inMoving Plan,
you will be able to set your goals, figure out ways around any issues
that might keep you from reaching your goals, and plan the
activities you want to do to reach your goals.
Your in Moving Plan
Here are the key elements to your successful plan for increasing the
amount of activity in your daily life. Go through these elements
here, and then make your own action plan, following the example
at the end of this section.
   Like all action plans, your goals are not meant to be a static
document. As you gain experience and work through barriers, your
goals and tips for overcoming barriers may change. Don’t be afraid
to adjust things as long as you make sure you stay committed to
living mindfully, staying active, and working toward your ultimate
goal of losing weight and keeping it off.
Why do you want to be more physically active?
   Think about the reasons you want to be more active. They can
cut across all parts of your life.


   Examples: I want to feel better about myself. I want to lose
weight. I want to feel more energized.
What’s bad about being sedentary?
   Think about the downsides of remaining inactive or not getting
enough activity. Again, they can cut across all parts of your life.
   Examples: I’ll stay heavy. I won’t feel good about myself. I’ll feel
down and sad.
What activities do you like to do?
   Think about activities that give you joy. A lot of di erent things
can count toward your exercise time. Be sure to choose activities
that you love and have fun doing. If you feel as though you don’t
enjoy doing anything active right now, pick the least objectionable
activity, or pick one for which you have a lot of social support, such
as walking with a close friend.
   Examples: walking, biking, gardening, gol ng, dancing, yoga,
hiking, basketball, tennis, martial arts, bowling, skating, active play
with your children or grandchildren, skiing, swimming
What are your time goals for being active each day?
   Ultimately, you want to get about thirty to eighty minutes of
moderate activity (or up to about ten thousand steps) every day.
Unless you’re close to that right now, though, you don’t want to
start with that goal. It’s best to build up to it, starting with one or
two easier goals that you can use to step up to your overall goal.
Maybe you want to start with twenty minutes a day (or twenty- ve
hundred steps) to start. Once you have done that for four weeks,
you can move the goal to forty minutes a day (or ve thousand
steps). Then after another successful four weeks, you can work
toward sixty minutes a day (or seventy-five hundred steps).
             Example:


             Goal 1: 2,500 steps/day (20 minutes/day)
             Goal 2: 5,000 steps/day (40 minutes/day)
             Goal 3: 7,500 steps/day (60 minutes/day)
What are two or three obstacles that can make it hard for you to be
active? What are a couple ways around each of these?
  Finding your way around obstacles that get in the way of being
active is a necessary part of the process, and this is so for the
Olympic marathoner as well as for the person just starting out.
Think about some of the key things that keep you from getting out
the door to get the exercise you need. They may be part of the list
of barriers we went over earlier in this chapter, or they may be
something else entirely. Once you have the top two or three, write
them down and then come up with ways you can get around them.
This will be your go-to list when things get tough and you are
looking for reasons to not get out the door.
             Example:
             Obstacle: I don’t have enough time.
             My tips: I’ll lay my clothes out the night before and get up early
          before the rest of the family.
             I’ll bring a sack lunch to work and go for a walk after I eat.
What are your mindful moving words?
  Choose a line or two (or all the lines) from the walking
meditation (see p. 170) to focus on while you are doing your
exercise of choice.
  Example: “I have arrived. I am home.”
Mindful Moving: An Opportunity to Help Our Planet Stay Green
As we consciously use our body more and come to depend less on
gadgets and automobiles for our chores and getting around, we not
only burn more calories but also contribute to reducing our
ecological footprint. There are many ways that you can move more


in your daily life. Use the stairs instead of the elevators or
escalators. Bike to work. Walk or bike to places within ve miles.
Use a push mower to cut your lawn and a rake to gather leaves.
Hang some of your laundry out to dry.
   In the book The World We Have, Thich Nhat Hanh talks about
the practice of a No-Car Day once a week in his monasteries and
practice centers as a way to reduce carbon emissions and gas
consumption.36 Practicing No-Car Days can give us much joy. We
can each do something concretely on a regular basis to protect the
planet and reduce global warming. Spread the joy and encourage
your family, friends, and colleagues to pledge themselves to a No-
Car Day once a month or once a week to start. (For more
information, visit www.carfreedays.org.)
The Bottom Line
For many of us, exercise is really challenging. It’s not easy to nd
the time. It can be unpleasant, especially early on. And there are a
lot of competing activities that may be less taxing and seemingly
more appealing. But our bodies and minds truly crave activity. For
thousands and thousands of years, humans have been active beings,
and this has been hardwired into our genes, our cells, our minds.
The fact that today’s modern life has sti ed this side of us doesn’t
mean it has faded away. To truly become ourselves, to truly realize
who we are, and to appreciate the physical capacity that we have
been uniquely endowed with requires us to reconnect with our
active selves, however out of touch with them we may be.
   This doesn’t mean you need to scale mountains or run marathons.
It’s much simpler than that. It simply means you need to spend
some time most days of the week doing physical activities you like.
It’s a practice in mindful moving that will help you transcend the
daily grind, connect with yourself, and reach your healthy weight
while contributing to the well-being of our world.




CHAPTER 7
Mindful Living Plan
NOW THAT WE’VE TALKED about the roles that food and physical
activity can play in our mindfulness practice and our journey
toward a healthy weight, it’s time to take a step back and take a
broader view of how we can incorporate mindfulness into our lives.
   Mindfulness practice touches the stillness in ourselves. It allows
us to calm down and re ect so that we can reconnect with our true
self. Our true self has been camou aged by our numbed, autopilot
way of life, our days overloaded with countless daily demands and
by the never-ending stimuli from our high-tech, advertising-driven
consumer society. When we are free from our automatic responses,
we can see more clearly things as they are, from moment to
moment, without judgment, preconceived notions, or bias. We get
to know ourselves better. We become much more in tune with our
own feelings, actions, and thoughts as well as with the feelings,
actions, and thoughts of others. As we live in each moment fully,
we learn to love ourselves and to make peace with all that is
around us. In sum, we simply savor life.
   Most people can’t practice healthy living even though they know
they should. There are innumerable inner and outer barriers we can
name. To transcend these, you need to ask yourself what it is that
you really want. Often our habit energy and fear prevent us from
identifying what we want and from living healthily. Habit energy
keeps us going, but we may not know where we are heading. We
struggle even during our sleep. We need to practice mindfulness in
our daily lives to check and transform the destructive habit energies


that are taking our lives in the wrong direction.
   With the creation of your healthy-weight mission statement, as
described in chapter 1, you have already taken the rst step on the
mindful journey to improving your health. As you practice with the
intention to improve your eating habits, you will nd that the same
mindful eating practices can change your perception of everything
else that you do and experience. Similarly, if you learn to approach
other aspects of your life with mindfulness, you will nd that these
good habits can in turn enhance your efforts to eat more healthily.
   Practice focusing on the now and immersing yourself entirely in
the task at hand, whatever it may be. You will nd that you can
complete the task with less e ort. The way you engage in the task
will completely determine the quality of the future. How the future
unfolds depends on the way we handle each present moment.
Being mindful from moment to moment gives us the greatest
opportunity to create a successful and beautiful future.
   Chapters 5 and 6 covered how to shine the light of mindfulness
on the everyday activities of eating and moving, and guided you
through the creation of the in Eating and in Moving strategies to
help you chart your mindfulness course. To jump-start you in your
mindfulness journey, we suggest a mindfulness practice plan to
help put together some of the exercises and recommendations that
we have talked about throughout the book and integrate them into
your daily routines. The proposed plan includes practices not only
in eating and moving for weight control, but also in transforming
and enjoying life. We call it the Mindful Living Plan. It has three
main components: inEating, inMoving, and inBreathing. As we
discussed, in denotes “in the moment.” These in strategies can be
personalized and integrated seamlessly into virtually every act of
your daily living, becoming the pillars for helping you build a
mindful life.
   While inEating and inMoving speci cally address food and
physical activity for health, the inBreathing strategy addresses all
other aspects of what we do and helps us transform our habits and
a ictions. The in-Breathing strategy helps awaken all our senses
and helps us be fully present to understand and skillfully handle
our thoughts, feelings, words, and actions.


   When we eat, we eat mindfully. When we exercise, we exercise
mindfully. We also look, listen, talk, touch, feel, think, and perceive
mindfully. We are breathing all the time, and being aware of our
breathing is the easiest and the most e ective practice to get us
focused on the present moment. Breathing is a core complement to
both eating and moving mindfully as well as to practicing
mindfulness throughout the day.
   When we live with awareness, we will gain insight and
understanding, diminish ignorance, and bring about love,
compassion, and joy. Understanding the interdependent and
impermanent nature of all things is the key to transformation, and
mindfulness energy is the source of power to fuel the
transformation process in every moment.
   Just as sunlight provides the energy for a seed to grow into a
plant, mindfulness provides the energy to transform all mental
formations—our mind states, which are expressions of seed energies
manifested in our mind. Mindfulness energy is like the sun: it has
only to radiate its energy to do its work naturally. The essential
point is that we do not try to repress our a ictions, our negative
energies, because the more we resist or ght them, the stronger they
will grow in us. We need only learn to recognize them, embrace
them, and bathe them in the energy of mindfulness. When there is
an abundance of mindfulness energy in us, it can transmute and
dilute the e ects of the negative seed energies in us. Cultivating
mindfulness energy will soothe and calm our negative emotions.
The Mindful Living Plan provides a practical framework to build
up such mindfulness energy.
   When we feel stuck and immobilized, we are in our own way.
Our ego is obstructing us. We are anxious, limited in our thinking,
reactive, doubtful, and always thinking and worrying about the
future or regretting the past rather than being with what’s now. We
become our worst enemy as we are overwhelmed by our fears, our
anger, and our despair. These fears, anger, and despair are illusions.
They are not real, but we believe they are real and let them
dominate us. Take a few in-breaths and out-breaths so that your
mind and your body are united again, allowing you to be fully in
the present. Once you can be in the present, you will recognize that
your fears, anger, and despair are all projections from the past.


They are not the present reality.
   This practice plan is only a guide to help you improve your well-
being. These practices are not rigid formulas but are simply
exercises to help you take the rst steps to get a taste of
mindfulness practice, to gain better insight, and to remove the
clouds that cover our clear vision. As we learn and put these
concepts into practice, it is important that we are not limited by
them but learn to use them to gain greater understanding. Certainly,
you can come up with your own practices by simply applying
mindfulness principles in ways that are relevant and appropriate to
your own life. The important thing is that you start taking the rst
few simple steps and see for yourself their e ect. Continual daily
practice will certainly build up your mindfulness energy. In the
following sections we describe the three main components of the
Mindful Living Plan: in Eating, in Moving, and in Breathing.
InEating
In chapter 5, we discussed the key components of a mindful,
nutritious eating plan, one that is good for you as well as our
planet, paying attention to not only what you eat but how you eat.
As you gradually increase your practice of mindful eating, you may
  nd that you will be more in tune with your hunger and fullness
cues. You may nd that you will eat when you are hungry and stop
when you are full. You may nd that you will make nutritious,
wise, and green food choices that are satisfying to you and good for
our planet. You may nd that you will eat with more awareness
and deeply enjoy the choices you make.
   At least once a day, eat one snack or one meal without any
sensory stimulus other than focusing on the food and drink you are
consuming. This means no television, no newspaper, no book, no
radio, no iPod, no mobile phone, no thinking or worries. Eat
slowly, really enjoy the food, and chew well to savor the taste of
the food and help with digestion.
   Take time to review the key nutrition principles in chapter 5 as
well as the seven habits of mindful eaters, and check which ones
you already have in place and which ones you need to change and
improve. As we discussed in chapter 5, identify those that are most


important to you so that you can come up with a list of food goals
and mindful-habit goals. Focus on a new food goal and a new
mindful eating practice every one or two weeks, and consciously
adhere to them on a daily basis. Take note of the challenges and
obstacles that prevent you from reaching your intended goals, and
plan strategies to overcome them.
  For example, if your food goal is to eliminate sugar-sweetened
beverages, be aware of your habit energy leading you to reach out
for a soda throughout the day. As you go toward a sugar-sweetened
soda, stop yourself, pause, take one in-breath and out-breath, and
say silently to yourself, “I made a commitment to eliminate sugar-
sweetened soda. I am going to have lime- avored sparkling water
instead.” If your mindful eating goal is to choose smaller portions,
use smaller utensils to serve yourself, and use a smaller plate. As
you adopt a new healthy eating habit and a new mindful eating
habit every week or two, over the course of four, eight, or twelve
weeks you will nd your daily eating practice to be much more
healthful and in line with your healthy-weight goals. Since you are
the one who decides which healthier choice you will incorporate
into your own daily eating plan, the likelihood of you sticking with
your choice is much greater than if the incentive for change were to
come from someone else.
InMoving
Even if we may no longer work in the elds like our ancestors,
there are many opportunities for us to move our bodies every day.
As we discussed in chapter 6, physical activity is one of the best
means of practicing mindfulness, because it is so connected with
body, mind, and the here and now. Our bodies (and our minds)
yearn to be active. The key is nding routines that you love and
that can be integrated into your everyday living.
  At least every day, nd a route or hallway you can walk
mindfully. It can be in your home, at work, in a park, or
somewhere around town where you walk often. As you walk, put
your full attention on your feet and their contact with the ground.
You walk for the sake of walking, not to reach any destination. You
walk without any “to do” list, regrets of the past, or worries about


the future. You breathe as you walk. For a slow pace, take two
steps for each in-breath and out-breath. For a brisker pace when
you need to reach your appointment on time, take three steps or
more for each in-breath and out-breath.
   To gain the physical, emotional, and weight-loss bene ts of
increased activity, review your in Moving plan from chapter 6.
What goals did you set for mindfully increasing your activity, and
what strategies did you develop for overcoming your barriers to
being more active? Use the goals you set to ll in the in Moving
section of your Mindful Living Plan.
   As you build up your practice of mindful moving, you will nd
yourself wanting to move more and more. And mindful moving
will become a habit—a good habit. When you skip your mindful
movement, you will find yourself missing it, even just for one day.
InBreathing
In Breathing involves every aspect of our lives. We have discussed
the importance of conscious breathing and mindfulness practice,
and we have given many exercises in chapter 4 that are wonderful
practices for the inBreathing strategy. We can only describe the
principle in the practice; it would be impossible to list all the
di erent ways to practice. However, to help you instill more
mindfulness into your daily actions as well as sustain mindfulness as
a way of life, we suggest that you consider trying some of the
exercises in chapter 4, and the additional meditations and verses in
this chapter. These are what we call “breathing meditations in
action”: you can use them as you engage in various tasks and
routines throughout the day. Pick and choose those that are relevant
and appealing to you.
   One of the aspects of engaged mindfulness practice is that it is
continuous. We don’t just have periods of mindfulness throughout
the day: we want to be mindful all day long, as much as possible.
When we incorporate mindfulness from moment to moment, we
stay fresh, peaceful, and protected from the push and pull of our
habit energy. We stay on track because we are awake, no longer on
autopilot. The meditations and verses given here are like signposts
along the road, reminding us of the speed limit, giving us


directions, helping us stay on track. And we need them all
throughout our journey, not just at the beginning or end. So it is
with mindfulness. We may start out our day very mindfully, but if
when we get in the car or bus to go to work we allow stress or
worry to overwhelm us, we have lost our way. So we need practices
throughout the day to help us remember to come back to our
breathing, relax, and stay present in this moment. In this way, we
will not be the victim of our stress and worry.
   As you practice these meditations and verses, keep in mind that
the very rst step in opening your heart to mindfulness is to stop
for a brief moment as soon as you are aware of your action. This
brief stop invites you to look deeply and gain insight into what you
are doing by being totally present at that moment. It is possible to
turn every activity we do into a meditation, even the most mundane
things—like using the toilet, brushing our hair, or putting on our
clothes—as long as we have awareness, with our mind and body
united.
Waking-Up Meditation
As you wake up every morning and before you get out of bed,
breathe with the waking-up meditation. Breathe three in-breaths
and out-breaths, repeating the following verse silently for each in-
breath and out-breath.
            Breathing      in,      I     ll    my      new    day with
            joy/faith/love/gratitude/mindfulness/ease/harmony.
            Breathing out, I smile.
   For the in-breath, choose one of the words that most appeals to
you.
Sunrise Meditation
Sunrise is a very special time of the day. It is transient, brief in
duration, yet magical if we can get up early enough to see it. It is
the beginning of a brand-new day. Dawn is a reminder that we can
start our life anew, unburdened by the troubles and worries of
yesterday. The energy from the emerging rays nurtures all there is
on Mother Earth, including plants, animals, and ourselves.


   Keep your window clear, and watch the sky become gradually lit
up with the rays of dawn. Witness the beauty of sunrise. As you see
the sun rising, breathe in and out a few times.
            Breathing in, I am aware of the sun.
            Breathing out, I thank the universe for the sun’s energy and
            brilliance.
Teeth-Brushing Meditation
Since we brush our teeth a number of times a day, it is a great
opportunity for us to practice mindfulness. Remember the advice
from your dentist: brushing our teeth properly will foster gum
health and the integrity of our teeth throughout our lives. Without
healthy teeth and gums, we would not be able to chew well and
enjoy our daily food.
   As you brush your teeth, breathe in and out a few times. Do not
think about your next assignment or errand. When you brush your
teeth, focus just on your teeth and gums, nothing else.
            Breathing in, I am aware of my teeth and gums.
            Breathing out, I look after my teeth and gums.
Hurrying Meditation
It is inevitable that we may nd ourselves in a hurry at times. As
you cultivate mindfulness, though, and plan your day better, your
tendency to hurry may very well decrease. Nevertheless, when you
do need to hurry, it doesn’t mean you need to forget mindfulness as
you rush along. It is better to be mindful than not mindful as you
hurry, if only to avoid accidents and mistakes. Mindful hurrying
means that you know you are hurrying. In a sense, you embrace
that you are hurrying. You focus on the task at hand and do it in a
faster and more e cient mode. Mindfulness doesn’t necessarily
mean going slow. You can be fast and still be mindful—totally
aware and relaxed. For example, if you are going from one building
to another in a hurry, you want to make sure that you are using the
shortest route. As you hurry, pay attention to your in-breath and
out-breath.


             Breathing in, I am moving quickly.
             Breathing out, I am in the flow.
Smiling Meditation
A smile is the universal language for happiness. When we see the
“smiley” face on stickers, shopping bags, or T-shirts, we
spontaneously smile even though we may not be in the best mood.
   It is important not to forget our own smile and the power it has.
Our smile can bring much joy and relaxation to us and to others
around us at the same time. When we smile, the muscles around
our mouth are stretched and relaxed, just like doing yoga. Smiling
is mouth yoga. We release the tension from our face as we smile.
Others who run into us notice it, even strangers, and are likely to
smile back. It is a wonderful chain reaction that we can initiate,
touching the joy in anyone we encounter. Smiling is an ambassador
of goodwill. As you smile, take a few in-breaths and out-breaths.
             Breathing in, I smile.
             Breathing out, I relax and touch joy.
Light-Switch Meditation
We turn on light switches many times a day, at home or at our
o ce. Each time you turn on a light switch, pause for a moment
and practice a few breathing meditations.
             Breathing in, I illuminate this room with light.
             Breathing out, I thank the electricity that is available to us.
   As you leave the room, turn o the light to save energy. Pause
again after turning o the light switch and breathe in and out a few
times.
             Breathing in, I am leaving this room.
             Breathing out, I am mindful of not wasting any electricity.
Sky Meditation
Staring into the sky, we see and feel the expansiveness of space, the
ever-changing scenery that captures our imagination, the power and


vastness of nature, and the smallness of ourselves in relation to our
universe. Staring into the sky o ers us a wonderful opportunity to
free ourselves from the burdens of our daily demands and from our
ego. It allows us to appreciate the reality of constant change and to
be free to dream.
             Breathing in, I see the magnificent sky.
             Breathing out, I feel free.
Jogging/Brisk-Walking Meditation
Jogging or brisk walking is a great form of exercise for our
cardiovascular health and weight control. Jogging unmindfully not
only deprives you of the joy of jogging but may even be
detrimental, because it can lead to injuries or accidents. As you jog
or walk briskly, focus on your legs, feet, and what is in front of your
eyes. If you are moving very briskly, you may shorten this
meditation so that on the in-breath you say silently to yourself the
word “moving,” and on the out-breath you say to yourself the word
“thanks.” (However many steps you take on your in-breath, say
“moving” with each step. And then however many steps on your
out-breath, say “thanks” with each step.)
             Breathing in, I keep moving.
             Breathing out, I thank my body for its strength, endurance. and
             coordination.
Driving Meditation
Driving meditation allows us to focus solely on our driving, with no
distraction from conversations with other passengers, no thinking,
no talking on the cell phone, and no text messaging. Discussions
with fellow passengers or someone on the phone can, with all good
intentions, end up in involved or heated conversations that distract
us from paying attention to what is happening on the road—and
what is happening in the moment.
             Breathing in, I am driving my car.
             Breathing out, I am mindful of all that is around me.


Traffic-Jam Meditation
Many people become impatient and irritable when they are in a
tra c jam. What can you do to speed up the tra c? Nothing. The
tra c will have to take its own course. And this actually makes it a
great time to practice mindfulness. It provides valuable time for us
to decompress and go back to the island of calm in ourselves to get
refreshed.
             Breathing in, I follow my in-breath.
             Breathing out, I follow my out-breath.
             Breathing in, I know everyone is trying to get somewhere.
             Breathing out, I wish everyone a peaceful, safe journey.
             Breathing in, I go back to the island of calm in myself.
             Breathing out, I feel refreshed.
Water-Faucet Meditation
In developed countries, clean sanitary water is available
continuously from the water faucet. Yet 1.1 billion people
worldwide are still without clean water.1 As we turn on our faucet,
it is a reminder of how blessed we are. An average American uses
four hundred liters of water a day.2 It takes twenty-four hundred
liters of water to produce a hamburger, but only twenty-four liters
to grow a pound of grain. We need to use water carefully and nd
ways to help others around the world have access to clean water—
an essential for daily living.
                Breathing in, as I turn on the faucet, I am grateful for the clean
                  water that sustains my life.
                Breathing out, I remember the billions of people who are
                  without clean water every day.
Elevator Meditation
While we are waiting for an elevator to arrive, it is easy for us to
become impatient and get irritated about the wait. This window of
time is actually a great opportunity to sneak in some conscious
breathing to help us maintain our calm and return to the present


moment.
   For those of us who are claustrophobic or afraid of heights,
breathing in and out mindfully is a wonderful way to take care of
our anxiety when it arises.
            Breathing in, I am aware of my in-breath.
            Breathing out, I am aware of my out-breath.
            Breathing in, I embrace my discomfort.
            Breathing out, I feel a lot of space and security inside me.
Greeting-Our-Negative-Emotions Meditation
It is human for all of us to have negative emotions on a daily basis
unless we are a seasoned mindfulness practitioner who knows how
to prevent and transform them. Whenever a negative emotion
arises, be it anger, despair, sadness, frustration, fear, or anxiety,
repeat the following gatha (verse) silently to yourself for three to
six in-breaths and out-breaths.
               Breathing in, I am aware of my
                 anger/despair/sadness/frustration/fear/anxiety.
               Breathing out, I embrace my
                 anger/despair/sadness/frustration/fear/anxiety.
   Name the emotion that is the strongest at that moment. The more
often you can catch your negative emotions as they arise, breathe
into them, and embrace them, the easier it is to transform them.
What you are essentially doing is preventing your body from
engaging neural pathways that produce stress hormones, which are
good for you when you need to jump out of the way of an
oncoming train but not helpful in the course of everyday life. The
more frequently we can disengage the coupling of perceived stress,
be it physical or emotional, to our body’s stress response, the
greater the likelihood that we can maintain our well-being. The
route to transformation is really as easy as going back to our in-
breath and out-breath—the action that we are all constantly
engaged in as long as we are alive. The only task for us is to be
aware of our emotions and reconnect to them through our in-breath


and out-breath.
Internet/E-mail Meditation
The Internet and e-mail are now a way of life and a principal
means of communication in the twenty- rst century. It is quite easy
to be totally consumed by the Internet, chained to our chair,
forgetting to get up and move around, eat or be in touch with our
body. After hours of staring at our computer screen, our eyes are
strained, our back may hurt, our shoulders are sti , and our mind
can become numb.
   We can refresh ourselves easily by breathing with awareness. The
following meditation is very helpful in preventing major mistakes
or disasters that occur when we are on computer overload, like
sending sensitive e-mails to unintended recipients. You can use it
whenever you write an e-mail before you click “Send.”
             Breathing in, I thank the power of the Internet.
                Breathing out, I am fully conscious of my current e-mail actions.
Deep-Listening-and-Loving-Speech Meditation
Many of us nd it di cult to communicate with our family
members or colleagues. At times we can become intolerant of them
and irritated with their views and advice. We lose our capacity to
listen deeply to them or the willingness to understand their point of
view. We cannot speak calmly with others, or when we do talk, our
own su ering, fear, or anxiety surfaces, and our words become
critical and bitter.
   We need to learn the art of listening and speaking. To help
restore communication, we need deep, compassionate listening to
help us understand others better. This means that our only intention
while listening is to help the other person su er less and express
what she has in her heart. We become completely present to just
receive what she needs to share, without judging or reacting. Even if
the other person says things that are not true, that contain a lot of
blame and bitterness, we do not correct her straightaway. We give
her space to share her feelings, and later on, maybe a day or two
later, we can slowly share information that will help her release her


wrong perceptions about us or the situation.
   We also need to apply the methods of loving speech, using only
words that inspire con dence, joy, and hope in others. We take
time to acknowledge the positive, beautiful things in others. We let
them know how important they are to us, and we thank them for
the way they contribute to our life. We also can very mindfully and
patiently express our di culties in our relationship with them
without judgment or blame. We take responsibility for our own
feelings and reactions but ask them to support us and help us by
watering the good seeds in us, not the negative ones. And we can
ask them how we can be of support to them when they go through
di culties. This way, we can attain peace and harmony in our
interactions.
   Start with your family or those you are closest to. Before starting
a conversation with a loved one, take a moment to breathe in and
out a few times.
             Breathing in, I listen deeply.
             Breathing out, I speak with love.
   As you form the habit of being able to listen deeply and speak in
a positive, constructive manner with your loved ones, it will spread
to other interactions you have with friends and colleagues.
Tree Meditation for Stability
A tree is an inspiring image of sturdiness. When there is a storm or
very strong wind, we see the branches shaking and bending. Yet the
trunk of the tree remains sturdy and still, with its roots rmly in the
soil. When you are in a state of turmoil or feeling vulnerable, look
for a tree. If there are none nearby, look at an image of a tree. You
may want to hang a picture of your favorite tree in your room or
o ce as a reminder to breathe in and out with the tree whenever
you feel unsteady.
             Breathing in, I am like the trunk of the tree.
             Breathing out, I can maintain my sturdiness despite stormy
             circumstances.


Flower Meditation
When we see a blooming ower, its natural beauty and fragrance
never fail to lift our spirit no matter which corner of the globe we
are in. Flowers bring us much joy and are a universal expression of
love and appreciation for others, both in celebrations and
memorials. Yet a flower withers shortly after it blooms—a profound
reminder of the impermanence of all life. Being with a ower
mindfully is a deep meditation.
                Breathing in, I am grateful for the beauty and fragrance of this
                  flower.
             Breathing out, I treasure the flower here and now.
Standing-in-Line Meditation
In our daily lives, we often nd ourselves having to wait in line.
Sometimes we get irritated by the wait. It can be the checkout line
at the supermarket, the security-check line at the airport, or the
pickup line at our child’s school. Being in a line is a great
opportunity to sneak in mindful breathing and refresh yourself.
                Breathing in, I use this time just for myself, to unite my body
                  and mind.
             Breathing out, I feel refreshed.
Multitasking Meditation
Juggling many tasks has become a way of life for many of us today.
It is particularly true for people who have children or older parents
to take care of, or for people who have to work more than one job
to make ends meet. Think about your daily “to do” list: going
shopping, preparing for a meeting at work, going to the post o ce,
making a doctor’s appointment, writing thank-you notes, and so
forth. As we increase our practice of mindfulness, we may become
more conscious of what is realistic for us to accomplish in one day.
                Breathing in, I am aware that I am juggling numerous tasks.
             Breathing out, I am mindful that I can accomplish only so much in
             one day.


  What actually helps us to be more e ective when we have many
things to do is to engage each task with our full awareness, not
worrying about the next task that needs to be done. While we run
an errand, we simply do that task with our whole being. Then
when we return home, we tackle the next task with the same focus
and concentration, not thinking about other tasks. This way, our
mind stays relaxed and fresh, and we have more energy to
accomplish the items on our list as well as greater exibility and
acceptance when we need to adjust our schedule or our “to do” list.
Key Meditation
We may often nd ourselves searching for our keys, whether they
are to our car, home, or o ce. It helps to have a designated key
hook in our home. Nevertheless, we still search for our keys
everywhere—in the pockets of our coat or pants, in our backpack
or briefcase. After you use a key, pause and breathe in and out to
remind yourself of where you are placing your keys.
            Breathing in, I am aware of my keys.
            Breathing out, I place my keys here.
Cooking Meditation
With our hectic, demanding lives, fast food, cafeteria meals, and
takeout from grocery stores or restaurants can become the mainstay
of our eating. Many of us no longer really cook. In New York City,
with meal-delivery service everywhere, even breakfast is commonly
delivered.
  Cooking can o er a sacred time for relaxing our mind and
nurturing our soul. The act of cooking inevitably involves
consciously thinking about what you would like to eat, purchasing
the right ingredients, preparing the food, and enjoying what you
created. Before you start preparing a meal in your kitchen, breathe
in and breathe out a few times to be in touch with the joy of
cooking.
               Breathing in, I thank the universe for the wonderful foods
                 available for this meal.
            Breathing out, I prepare this meal with love and joy.


Sunset Meditation
Every day the sun rises and the sun sets. Even if we do not have a
full view of the sunset, seeing the light rays through a window
around that time o ers another precious opening for conscious
breathing and renewal at the end of the day. As we enjoy the sunset
and begin to wind down, we can re ect on our day and let go of
the events of the day.
                Breathing in, I thank the sun for all its energy, which sustains all
                  beings on earth.
                Breathing out, I will also do my part to support all of life and
                  help reverse global warming.
Good-Night Meditation
Before you sleep, unwind with the good-night meditation with
three in-breaths and out-breaths, repeating the following verse
silently for each in-breath and out-breath.
            Breathing in, I release my worries/thoughts.
            Breathing out, I touch peace.
Ten-Week Sample Mindful Living Plan
Now that we have described the three pillars of daily mindfulness
practice, it is time for you to put your in Eating, in Moving, and in
Breathing strategies into a practical plan. On a daily basis, this
means that you increase the practice of mindful breathing
integrated into various daily routines. You have a healthy-eating
routine that includes reducing the amount of calories you eat each
day; you have a healthy-moving routine that includes increasing the
amount of calories you burn in physical activity. And, you have a
strategy to practice consolidating good habits as well as the mindful
transformation of negative emotions. Set speci c goals, and stick
with them. If you nd yourself falling o track, re ect on how and
why you were not able to achieve what you intended. Through
mindful awareness, re ect on ways that can support you in getting
back on the right path. It will take time before these practices


become second nature. However, the more you are aware, the more
attention you pay from moment to moment in your daily living, the
more you will nd yourself increasing mindful practices throughout
the day without consciously trying. Over time, the practices will
become effortless, fulfilling routines that you love.
   The ten-week sample plan will help you integrate the practical
tools of mindful living into your daily life, with emphasis on weight
control. The ten-week duration is only an illustration. You may
need a shorter or longer time to practice, and you may choose the
exercises you like to do. Throughout all the exercises, maintain
conscious breathing as the foundation of your movement. For the
inBreathing strategy, don’t feel compelled to do all the exercises
suggested during each two-week segment. But do keep adding more
exercises from one interval to the next. The progression suggested
in the ten-week plan starts with building up positive energies and
progresses to recognizing and transforming negative habit energies
so that you can remain steady on your path to good health. There is
no rigid formula for success. The key to improvement is continuing
to practice every day. (See table 7.1.)
Stay on Track
Staying on track means doing what you intend to do and staying
committed. Do not underestimate your resilience and
resourcefulness. You have the power and the ability. Your journey
to a healthier weight is not a journey that you start and then give
up. It is a journey that you are living every day for the rest of your
life. However, it is natural for you to encounter obstacles
throughout this journey.
   Sometimes you may feel discouraged, thinking that weight loss is
an unattainable goal. Whenever you encounter such negative
feelings, breathe in and out a few times to come back to the present
reality. You can then embrace your doubts with compassion and
awareness and see past the illusion they create. You have the
capacity to change and to overcome every obstacle or challenge you
face on your healthy-weight journey. You may need others to
support you, including your family, friends, coworkers, and doctor.
Think of how they can help you to eat healthier and stay active.


Then, be proactive and ask for their help.
   We o er you a few other practical suggestions to help you stay
on track. These include keeping a daily mindful living log, getting
social support, having a good sleep routine, and doing something
every day to nurture yourself and connect to nature.
Keep a Mindful Living Log
Research has shown that monitoring and tracking one’s weight can
help people lose weight as well as maintain their weight,3 so weigh
yourself every morning or once a week to know your weight.
Recording one’s eating and physical activity has also been reported
to be strongly associated with weight control.4
   Journaling is useful for exploring what you are ready for and
what you are not. Journaling helps us look deeply. Find the most
ideal time of the day for pondering your mindful living log. For
some, it is the morning, when the mind is clear. For others, it may
be the evening before going to bed. What’s important is to nd a
window of time every day during which you can focus on your own
body, your mind, your feelings, and your inward experiences so that
you know what is going on with yourself. Use your daily mindful
living log to track your progress and whether you are reaching your
daily in Eating, in Moving, and in Breathing goals. Record your
weight in the mindful living log as well.
   You can also do this yourself online. Many Web sites o er online
food diaries that automatically calculate your calorie intake. A free,
and ad-free, site worth trying is MyPyramid Tracker
(www.mypyramid tracker.gov), set up by the U.S. Department of
Agriculture to support its new food pyramid. The site also has an
exercise tracker.
   Attackpoint is also a good, free Web site for tracking activity
(www.attackpoint.org). It’s geared toward serious athletes; but don’t
be intimidated: it’s got a lot to o er everyone. Weight can be
tracked as well.


Get Social Support
Getting support is important to your weight loss and weight
maintenance. Recognizing the popularity of various diets di ering
in suggested amounts of fats and protein—like Atkins, Zone,
Mediterranean, and South Beach—scientists conducted a
sophisticated trial to ascertain di erent diets’ e ectiveness in
inducing weight loss. Researchers were surprised that they did not
  nd much di erence among the various dietary approaches.5


However, they found that when one is able to stick with the eating
routine, it made a di erence. Those who attended the group
sessions lost more weight than those who skipped the sessions.
These group sessions were designed to help keep participants
motivated and informed while addressing their concerns. This
  nding suggests that behavioral, psychological, and social factors
are probably far more important for weight loss than the relative
amount of nutrients in a diet.
   Other research has shown that social support can help individuals
lose weight and sustain behavior change for weight control.
Researchers found that weight loss can be greater when the spouse
is included in the weight-loss program.6 Others have found that
couples can lose weight together even if only one of them is
enrolled in a formal program.7 Even more interesting, some
researchers have observed that obesity appears to spread through
social networks, such that our friends—of the same sex—may
in uence our tendency to lose or gain weight even more than our
spouses. And our close friends may not be the only ones who
in uence us most with regard to weight gain and loss; more-distant
acquaintances, the friends of friends, may also have some in uence
on our behavior.8 The lead researcher on this latter study, Dr.
Nicholas Christakis, suggests that these social interconnections can
empower us to do good—both for ourselves and for others. “Even
as we are being in uenced by others, we can in uence others….
And therefore the importance of taking actions that are beneficial to
others is heightened. So this network thing can cut both ways,
subverting our ability to have free will, but increasing, if you will,
the importance of us having free will.”9
   Social support can come from your family, your friends, your
colleagues at work, or even virtual online communities. Re ect and
identify all possible support that you may be able to get among all
the people you know in your social network—people who may
also want to live more mindfully or are struggling with their weight
like yourself. The support system does not need to be face-to-face.
You may nd support on a social-networking site. You may also
want to start your own mindful living group with your own family,
friends, or neighbors. Begin with even one person who can get


together with you regularly every week. The group can grow over
time as friends tell other friends. The important thing is that you
have your network of people who share the same vision and are
committed to the practice of mindful living.
   Buddhist teachings greatly emphasize the role of the sangha. A
sangha is a spiritual community of like-minded practitioners. A very
powerful, collective energy of mindfulness is generated when
people practice together, and this energy can support us and help
us continue our practice when our own willpower is weak. This is
why monks and nuns, as well as laypeople, in many spiritual
traditions live together. And the Buddha often said that it is only in
a sangha that you can realize the dharma, the teachings of the
Buddha. This is why the Three Jewels—Buddha, dharma, and
sangha—interact: when you touch one, you touch the other two.
   Whenever people leave one of our retreats, we always encourage
them to join a sangha in their local area or start one if one doesn’t
yet exist. This is the best way to ensure an energetic and joyful
continuation of your practice after the retreat. Alone, we will
quickly succumb to our usual habits and lose our mindfulness
practice. Sangha-building is the noblest task, the most important
thing a practitioner can do. And in the Buddhist tradition, we speak
of Maitreya, the future Buddha. In fact, it may be that the future
Buddha will become manifest as a sangha, not as an individual,
because this is what the world needs. Individual awakening is no
longer enough. A collective awakening is necessary for us to survive
as a species.
   If you are interested in connecting with others who practice
mindfulness, there are hundreds of local sanghas all over the world.
At www.iamhome.org you can nd a worldwide list of sanghas in
the Thich Nhat Hanh tradition.
Get a Good Night’s Sleep
We mentioned in chapter 1 that research suggests that a good
night’s sleep may also be essential to controlling your weight. As a
result of not having enough sleep, you may be too tired to exercise,
or you eat more because you get hungrier when you stay up late.
When you’re tired you have trouble knowing what your body really


needs, and when you don’t sleep enough you simply have more
hours in the day available to eat. Help yourself establish good sleep
habits by going to bed at a regular hour to minimize uctuations in
your circadian rhythm, which is closely related to the release of
hormones a ecting your sleep. Avoid caf-feinated drinks after
midafternoon unless you want to deliberately stay awake late at
night. Avoid eating a big, heavy meal late at night, since it can
cause indigestion and disrupt your ability to sleep. Do not drink
alcohol with the idea that it can help you sleep better. Though
alcohol may act like a sedative or tranquillizer because it is a
central nervous system depressant, it actually interferes with sleep
and may result in insomnia.10 Before sleeping, refrain from any
stimulating activity including exercising, watching violent movies,
or listening to loud music. Help yourself fall asleep peacefully by
reading for pleasure, listening to soft music, and practicing your
good-night meditation.
Do Something Every Day to Nurture Yourself
What are you doing to nurture yourself every day? Don’t forget to
love and care for yourself while you are loving and taking care of
others. Loving yourself is the basis for loving other people. Be your
own best friend.
   Re ect on whether you have been really nurturing yourself,
feeding yourself with the good nutriments for your physical body as
well as your spirit. Consider not only what you have been doing to
take care of your family members or your friends, but how you
have been caring for yourself and for your own well-being too.
   Do you know your passion? Are you doing the work you love?
Do you know what you really want to do in this life? Are you doing
what you want to do? Or are you losing yourself because you are
trying to meet someone else’s expectations? You don’t have to be
trapped in any predicament. You have the freedom and ability to
lead your life the way you want.
   Start nurturing yourself by identifying an activity that will help
you refuel your enthusiasm and life force daily. Do things that will
capture your spirit and bring you joy, watering your positive seeds
in your consciousness. It can be something very simple, such as


listening to your favorite song, appreciating a favorite drawing,
watching the birds feeding from the bird feeder, staring at a beam
of light from the sky touching the horizon, enjoying a beautiful
  ower, or chatting with a friend who has a great sense of humor.
Don’t just sit there and wait for your negative feelings to pass.
Complaining will not change your life. Change your thinking, and
you can let go of limitations you imposed on yourself. Explore, and
be proactive.
Get Back to Nature
Writers from Lao-tzu to Ralph Waldo Emerson have urged humans
to be in tune and in touch with nature. Many of us may have
experienced that whenever we spend time with nature: whether
we’re in the forest staring at the trees or watching a peaceful pond,
we are refreshed and feel better.
   Research has shown that nature actually can have an impact on
our mental functioning. According to environmental psychologists,
urban environments can dull our thinking and a ect our memory. If
you walk down a street in the city, there are many signs and cues to
draw your attention, like the threat of wayward cars or the
attractive window displays. Paying attention like this takes energy
and e ort, according to these researchers. Our brain can get
“directed-attention fatigue,” resulting in greater distractibility and
irritability. In contrast, as we are walking along a pond with trees,
the images in nature enter our mind without provoking lots of
mental activity, draining us of energy or triggering a negative
emotional response. Our brain can relax deeply and replenish itself.
This is why scientists think that immersing ourselves in nature—or
even just viewing a tree or a patch of green from a window—can
have a restorative effect.11
Prevent Relapses
It is normal for all of us to slip and go back to our old habits
despite our best intentions. This can be very discouraging. How do
we prevent relapse? This is a scienti c topic that has been studied
extensively in the treatment of addictive behaviors such as
alcoholism.12 Researchers identi ed three “high-risk situations” that


were linked to nearly 75 percent of relapses they studied.13 These
three situations are negative emotional states, interpersonal con ict,
and social pressure. The researchers proposed three strategies to
cope with these high-risk situations—namely, coping-skills training,
cognitive therapy, and lifestyle modi cation. In the domain of
lifestyle modi cation, researchers recommended the use of
meditation, exercise, and spiritual practices as ways to help support
a person’s overall coping strategy.14
   When we practice mindfulness, we can become more aware and
catch the moment when we rst begin to slip. Slipping is just
slipping. It doesn’t mean we’re sliding back to where we started,
and it doesn’t imply that we have failed. It is just a signal that we
have to get back on the right course. Some routines may not be
working quite right for you, so you’ll need to tweak them to make
them better. Or you may have been distracted by something
happening in your life without being conscious of it. Every mindful
moment is a new opportunity to prevent relapse. We can begin
anew every moment. That’s one of the real powers of mindfulness.
   The Five Mindfulness Trainings are a good tool to prevent
relapse and stay on course. (See gure 7.1.) They are also a
concrete way to practice compassion, understanding, and love. They
are a moral compass guiding us toward a healthy, happy life.
   The first mindfulness training strengthens our innate reverence for
life and reminds us of the su ering caused by the destruction of life,
be it of the lives of people, animals, plants, or minerals. The second
mindfulness training encourages our true happiness by reminding
us that happiness can only be found in the present moment,
through the practice of generosity and interconnectedness. It also
raises our awareness of the su ering caused by exploitation, social
injustice, stealing, and oppression. The third mindfulness training
nurtures our capacity for true love and raises our awareness of the
su ering caused by unmindful sexuality. The fourth mindfulness
training invites us to care for ourselves and others through loving
speech and deep listening and addresses the su ering caused by
unmindful speech and the inability to listen to others. The fth
mindfulness training promotes our nourishment and healing
through mindful consumption and is integral to our aspiration to
attain a healthy weight. Recite the Five Mindfulness Trainings


regularly—say, once a week—to support your mindful living.
   Figure 7.1 THE FIVE MINDFULNESS TRAININGS
      The Five Mindfulness Trainings represent the Buddhist vision for a global
   spirituality and ethic. They are a concrete expression of the Buddha’s
   teachings on the Four Noble Truths and the Noble Eightfold Path, the path of
   right understanding and true love, leading to healing, transformation, and
   happiness for ourselves and for the world. To practice the Five Mindfulness
   Trainings is to cultivate the insight of interbeing, or Right View, which can
   remove all discrimination, intolerance, anger, fear, and despair. If we live
   according to the Five Mindfulness Trainings, we are already on the path of a
   bodhisattva. Knowing we are on that path, we are not lost in confusion about
   our life in the present or in fears about the future.
   Reverence for Life
   Aware of the su ering caused by the destruction of life, I am committed to
   cultivating the insight of interbeing and compassion and to learning ways to
   protect the lives of people, animals, plants, and minerals. I am determined not
   to kill, not to let others kill, and not to support any act of killing in the world,
   in my thinking, or in my way of life. Seeing that harmful actions arise from
   anger, fear, greed, and intolerance, which in turn come from dualistic and
   discriminative thinking, I will cultivate openness, non-discrimination, and
   nonattachment to views in order to transform violence, fanaticism, and
   dogmatism in myself and in the world.
   True Happiness
   Aware of the su ering caused by exploitation, social injustice, stealing, and
   oppression, I am committed to practicing generosity in my thinking, speaking,
   and acting. I am determined not to steal and not to possess anything that
   should belong to others; and I will share my time, energy, and material
   resources with those who are in need. I will practice looking deeply to see
   that the happiness and su ering of others are not separate from my own
   happiness and su ering; that true happiness is not possible without
   understanding and compassion; and that running after wealth, fame, power,
   and sensual pleasures can bring much su ering and despair. I am aware that
   happiness depends on my mental attitude and not on external conditions, and
   that I can live happily in the present moment simply by remembering that I
   already have more than enough conditions to be happy. I am committed to


practicing right livelihood so that I can help reduce the su ering of living
beings on earth and reverse the process of global warming.
True Love
Aware of the su ering caused by sexual misconduct, I am committed to
cultivating responsibility and learning ways to protect the safety and integrity
of individuals, couples, families, and society. Knowing that sexual desire is not
love, and that sexual activity motivated by craving always harms myself as well
as others, I am determined not to engage in sexual relations without true love
and a deep, long-term commitment made known to my family and friends. I
will do everything in my power to protect children from sexual abuse and to
prevent couples and families from being broken by sexual misconduct. Seeing
that body and mind are one, I am committed to learning appropriate ways to
take care of my sexual energy and to cultivating loving-kindness, compassion,
joy, and inclusiveness—which are the four basic elements of true love—for my
greater happiness and the greater happiness of others. Practicing true love, we
know that we will continue beautifully into the future.
Loving Speech and Deep Listening
Aware of the su ering caused by unmindful speech and the inability to listen
to others, I am committed to cultivating loving speech and compassionate
listening in order to relieve su ering and to promote reconciliation and peace
in myself and among other people, ethnic and religious groups, and nations.
Knowing that words can create happiness or su ering, I am committed to
speaking truthfully, using words that inspire con dence, joy, and hope. When
anger is becoming manifest in me, I am determined not to speak. I will
practice mindful breathing and walking in order to recognize and to look
deeply into my anger. I know that the roots of anger can be found in my
wrong perceptions and lack of understanding of the su ering in myself and in
the other person. I will speak and listen in a way that can help myself and the
other person transform su ering and see the way out of di cult situations. I
am determined not to spread news that I do not know to be certain and not to
utter words that can cause division or discord. I will practice right diligence
to nourish my capacity for understanding, love, joy, and inclusiveness, and
gradually transform the anger, violence, and fear that lie deep in my
consciousness.
Nourishment and Healing
Aware of the su ering caused by unmindful consumption, I am committed to
cultivating good health, both physical and mental, for myself, my family, and
my society by practicing mindful eating, drinking, and consuming. I will


    practice looking deeply into how I consume the four kinds of nutriments—
    namely, edible foods, sense impressions, volition, and consciousness. I am
    determined not to gamble or to use alcohol, drugs, or any other products that
    contain toxins, such as certain Web sites, electronic games, TV programs,
      lms, magazines, books, and conversations. I will practice coming back to the
    present moment to be in touch with the refreshing, healing, and nourishing
    elements in me and around me, not letting regrets and sorrow drag me back
    into the past or letting anxieties, fears, or cravings pull me out of the present
    moment. I am determined not to try to cover up loneliness, anxiety, or other
    su ering by losing myself in consumption. I will contemplate interbeing and
    consume in a way that preserves peace, joy, and well-being in my body and
    consciousness, and in the collective body and consciousness of my family, my
    society, and the earth.
    For a full commentary on the Five Mindfulness Trainings, see For a Future to
    Be Possible, by Thich Nhat Hanh. Source: Plum Village Web site,
    http://www.plum village.org/mindfulness-trainings/3-the- ve-mindfulness-
    trainings.html.
Reach the Point of No Failure
Now you have all the tools you need to cultivate mindful living and
embark on your mindful journey to attain a healthier weight. Bear
in mind that having faith that you can accomplish your intended
goal and being diligent in your practice are keys to reaching your
destination. Doing everything the way you most enjoy doing it
helps you remain mindful. With mindfulness practice, there is no
failure—only awareness of what works, what doesn’t work, and
how to improve the practice at hand. Every mindful step counts.
The important thing on this journey is the process, not the
destination. Throughout the day, there are many opportunities
available to cultivate mindfulness. Find the daily tasks, chores, and
events that inspire you the most for integrating mindfulness.
   Surrender to what life presents to you in the moment. Stay open,
and allow events to unfold. Bear witness to those events, and
observe them with equanimity. What is that particular event trying
to teach you or alert you to? Stay concentrated on your intentions
and goals. With mindfulness, concentration, and your ability to


remain nonjudgmental, you will keep gaining valuable insights into
all that is needed for you to make progress. This cultivation also
helps you become more solid on your path and freer from worries
and anxieties over failure.
   Through your daily re ection with your mindful living log, thank
all the people, beings, and things that have made your life and the
way you live possible, as well as those who have helped you stay
on the path of mindful living. For example, think of the salad that
you had for lunch: how many people and processes are needed to
assemble the rainbow-colored salad that you ate? Such
contemplation will reinforce your awareness of how blessed and
supported you are every day by people you know and by many
people you do not know. Thinking like this, you will realize that
life is a miracle, that we have much to be grateful for, and that we
are all very lucky to have the opportunity to savor it all.




PART 3
Individual and Collective Effort




CHAPTER 8
A Mindful World
           There are hundred thousands of stems linking us to everything in
           the cosmos,
           Supporting us and making it possible for us to be.
           Do you see the link between you and me?
           If you are not there,
           I am not here.
                         –Thich Nhat Hanh, The Heart of Understanding (1988)
WE HAVE PRESENTED THE latest science-based advice, and the
age-old tradition of mindfulness, as means to help us understand
and transform the unhealthy habits that have led to our overweight.
With consistent practice, you will be well on your way to adhering
to lifestyle choices that improve your well-being. As you practice
mindful living in your daily life, you will gain further insight into
the interconnectedness of all things and begin to see the e ect of
your daily practice extending well beyond your own body—and
beyond your own well-being. Science informs us that when our diet
is more plant based, and when we exercise regularly, our health
will improve. By mindfully reducing meat consumption, you are
also performing a miracle, because your change in diet indirectly
helps make food more available to hungry children in
underdeveloped countries as well as reduce global warming. When
more of us practice mindfulness this way, we are creating
transformation at not only the individual level but also the
collective level. We are changing the world.
   Our well-being and the well-being of the world are mutually
dependent. We need to stay well at the individual level, and then
we will be able to contribute to the well-being of others. By living
mindfully, and seizing every moment to live with understanding


and compassion, we improve not only our own health but that of
all future generations.
The Wise Graduate
On her graduation day in June 2007, senior and salutatorian
Jennifer Leigh Levye delivered her address to her Sharon High
School classmates in Sharon, Massachusetts. In her speech, she cited
the teachings of Thich Nhat Hanh, which were passed on to her by
her sophomore English teacher, Mr. Murray.
           Thich Nhat Hanh, … holding up an orange, said, “The entire world
           is inside this orange.” “Inside an orange?” was the thought that ran
           through many of our minds. How can the entire world be inside
           something as small as an orange?
              But think about everything that goes into making an orange. The
           tree it grows on, the ground it grows in, the water that nourishes it,
           the sun that gives it the energy to grow. If any of these things are
           removed, the orange won’t exist, so they are all inside the orange.
           That idea can be pulled out further—a person had to plant the tree,
           another probably picked the fruit, a third packaged and shipped it.
           Each of these people was in uenced by others and so on until
           everyone can be connected to the orange—if any one thing were
           different, it would not exist.
              So, from … that orange, we see both that our ideas and
           experiences intertwine and that we are all linked to each other. This
           isn’t the most di cult of ideas to talk about, but it seems very
           di cult to put into practice. We tend to see ourselves as isolated
           islands, or as too insigni cant to have an e ect on the world as a
           whole. We often think of other people’s problems as remote and
           having no impact on ourselves. We believe that foreign ideas are
           separate from ours, and we do not really need to understand them.
           Though these assumptions are common and easy to fall back on, we
           can remember that our actions do not occur in bubbles, and that we
           are impacted by the lives of people outside our little spheres. If the
           entire world is inside an orange, it is also inside each and every one


           of us—if any part of it were different, we would be different.
             … [R]emember that everything is connected and that the whole
           world is inside us. Everyone in uences us in a great web, and we
           can in uence it by changing some small part…. [I]f we take away
           from these four years the idea that we are all connected and that we
           can bring about change, our education has not been in vain, and the
           world will become a better place.” 1
  It is impressive that a young woman like Jennifer already had the
wisdom to realize that we do not exist as separate islands.
Everything in the universe depends on everything else for its
existence. There is nothing that can exist as a separate, independent
entity. We are all connected. Our thoughts, speech, and actions
a ects our family, our community, and our country, rippling out to
the entire world. At the same time, the state of our family,
community, country, and world a ects our own state of being.
When Jennifer said, “Everyone in uences us in a great web, and we
can in uence it by changing some small part,” she raised the
awareness of all her classmates and called them to action.
Individual and Collective Well-Being
Self and other are concepts created by us as conventional notions to
communicate our ordinary, everyday perceptions. Although these
concepts can facilitate communication, they often mislead, and
cloud our understanding of the true nature of reality. In our
ordinary perception, we see things as independent of one another.
We generally perceive things according to preexisting constructs in
our mind, which manifest themselves from seeds in our store
consciousness. If we are not mindful, these mind constructs may
distort the true reality of what we experience. We are often caught
and misled by these conventional concepts and their many illusions
of duality, like self and other, you and me, inside and outside, being
and nonbeing, coming and going, individual and collective, one and
many, life and death.
  In our ordinary perception, we readily understand a table as a


separate, independent object with a at surface and four legs. But if
we look deeply into the table, we see that it is made only of non-
table elements—all the phenomena needed for its manifestation:
wood, earth, water, re, air, space, and time. The existence of the
table depends on the causes and conditions of all these elements in
the entire universe. That is the interdependent nature of the table. It
cannot come into being if any one of the conditions or elements is
missing.
   This is interbeing. One thing depends on the manifestation of all
other things, and what makes the all possible is the one. One is all,
and all is one. In the one you touch the all, and in the all you touch
the one. Everything in the universe is present in each of us. I am in
you, and you are in me.
            I know that you are still there because I am still here.
            The arms of perception embrace all,
            joining life to death, subject to object, everything to everything
            else.2
   We need to cut through the ideas of “individual” and “collective,”
“inside” and “outside” to see the truth. Inside is made of outside.
Our body is not just something that is bound by our skin. Our body
is much greater; it is without boundary. For the body to function,
we need earth, water, air, heat, and minerals, which are both inside
and outside our body. Try to experience the magic of your
boundless body the next time you go into a lake or the ocean. Close
your eyes, and feel the intimate communion between your body
and the water: your body is the water, and the water is your body.
The ocean is expansively connected to all things, and so are you.
   Looking deeply this way, we can appreciate that the sun is our
second heart. If the heart inside our body stops beating, we will die.
Similarly, if the sun, our second heart, stops shining, we will also
die. Our body is the whole universe, and the whole universe is our
body. There is nothing in the universe that is not part of us, be it a
speck of dust on the table or a shining star in the sky. This insight is
possible only when we transcend the notions of inside and outside,


self and other. It is important for us to live mindfully so that we are
truly present in every moment, always alive and nourishing the
insight of interbeing.
   When we practice mindful breathing, smiling, and walking in a
group or at a retreat, the collective energy generated by the group
helps us build up our own mindfulness energy. When we make an
e ort to cultivate our mindfulness energy individually in this group
setting, we also enhance the energy of the entire group. The
individual and the collective are not separate entities. When we
touch our inner peace, we smile with joy. The moment we beam a
smile, not only do we feel a little happier, but those around us also
begin to feel lighter. Individual action always has an e ect on the
collective, and collective action always has an e ect on the
individual. When we are looking deeply, the moment we take a
mindful step the world changes; everything changes.
   When we see more people living mindfully, practicing loving-
kindness with understanding and compassion, we gain con dence
in our future. When we practice mindful breathing, smiling, eating,
walking, and working, we become a positive element in society,
and we will inspire con dence in everyone around us. This is the
best way to ensure that a future is possible for the younger
generations.
From Compassion to Action
To e ectively transform our world, we need to touch the source of
real strength to mobilize us. Intellect alone cannot motivate us to
act compassionately. This strength lies not in power or money, but
in our deep, inner peace. This means that we must transform
ourselves rst to become solid and peaceful. True transformation
comes from within. We make changes in our daily lives—in the
way we think, speak, act—becoming solid and peaceful,
transforming ourselves and the world.
   Compassion is a source of powerful, boundless, and wise energy.
This is the energy that will move us to act. However, just feeling


compassion is not enough; we have to act on it. Understanding and
insight guide us to act. That is why love and compassion must
always be combined with understanding.
   We can cultivate compassion by performing even the smallest
acts. If while practicing walking meditation we come across an ant
on our path and step aside to avoid crushing it, we are cultivating
compassion. If we practice looking deeply and live our daily lives
mindfully, our compassion will grow stronger each day. We as
individuals can initiate change. When more of us are practicing
mindfulness, there will be a change in our collective consciousness.
We need to wake ourselves up, and we also need to wake up the
collective community. Mindfulness practice at the individual and
collective level is the key to this awakening. Our e orts both to
change ourselves and to change the environment are necessary, but
one cannot happen without the other.
   When you live mindfully, taking care of yourself, becoming solid,
peaceful, whole, and well, you are empowered to do your part to
improve the well-being of all those around you and the well-being
of the world. If each of us builds up this collective compassion, we
can create a sea change. We must not waste time, but immerse
ourselves in the present moment in order to have a clear
perspective of our difficult circumstances and transform them.
   The practice of mindful consumption should become a global
practice. We have to encourage it at both the individual and the
collective levels. We need to introduce and support greater
mindfulness in all aspects of our lives and invite everyone to join
us: parents, educators, students, physicians, social workers, lawyers,
scientists, novelists, reporters, lmmakers, businesspeople,
architects, artists, farmers, police o cers, factory workers, janitors,
economists, legislators, and world leaders. This is true peace
education.
The World and You
There are many examples that constantly remind us that we are all


connected, that we live a life of interbeing. Our tendency is to focus
on ourselves for our survival and achievement. Yet in reality we are
not separate from others. The nancial crisis in the United States in
2008 revealed that we are all interconnected—rich and poor
people, farming and manufacturing industries, developed and
underdeveloped countries. The banking crisis not only a ected the
economy in the United States; it also quickly rippled out to a ect
other markets around the world. The pandemic caused by the
H1N1 in uenza—often referred to as the “swine” u—is another
concrete example, one in which the source of the virus could well
have been pigs. Once one child in Mexico got infected with the
virus, the virus quickly spread to Mexico’s neighbor, to all of the
fifty states of the United States, and within months to forty countries
around the world in 2009. With technological advances in
communication and travel in the twenty- rst century, our world is
shrinking, and we are more connected than ever before.
   When we are mindfully aware from moment to moment, we
realize, “One contains all. All contains one.” Just pause to focus on
anything that is in front of you—a ower, a computer, a
photograph, a glass of water—and you’ll see the miracles that
connect our world, how all the things we need in our daily life,
anywhere and anytime, exist only because of this limitless web of
connections. Think of your commute by train or bus from home to
work. Could you have access to this transportation without
countless others? The train you are riding on is the culmination of
years of dedicated hard work by designers, engineers, and
craftsmen. The road your bus travels exists only because of the hard
work of the highway crew, urban planners, and the many others
who also use it. Without all these people, it would take you hours
or even an entire day to get to work, just as it does for people who
live in developing countries, many of whom still walk on foot to
get from one place to another and to meet their daily needs.
Thinking this way, you will realize how blessed we are to be able
to rely on so many others. We take many things for granted. Many
of us tend to be self-centered, living fearfully, with a scarcity mind-


set, and trying to accumulate more wealth, power, or status so that
we can become more secure. Living like this prevents us from
seeing the many wonders that already surround us. Every time we
leave our home and commute to work, we can give thanks to all
the people who built the commuter trains and buses and
constructed the roadways.
   There is a human need for meaning, for purposeful connection,
for community, and for real engagement in the world. All of us
have a great capacity for compassion. We want to help those who
are really in need, who are su ering. We want to make the world a
better place for this generation and many generations to come. But
how do we begin to do this?
   Transforming the world starts with oneself. It is through attending
to our own well-being and staying in touch with what is happening
in our own personal lives that we can have a greater capacity to
understand and address the world’s su ering. We are then on a
sturdier foundation to contribute to improving our world. Have you
ever su ered from fatigue or exhaustion from helping others—
family, friends, work colleagues, others in your community?
Recognize that it is not really possible to steadily help others when
we ourselves are not in a good physical, mental, or emotional state.
We may be able to carry on for a while, but sooner or later we end
up feeling depleted, discouraged, or weak. We cannot keep on
giving when we are running on an empty tank. We need to be
solid. We need to practice mindful living to be able to o er our
best to our family, our friends, and our world.
Influence and Support
For us to be able to eat healthfully and stay physically active, we
not only need to have the knowledge, the focus, and the motivation
to carry out these daily healthy practices; we also need support
from the people and places that we encounter each day—from our
closest family and friends, our homes and o ces, to the world at
large. The Healthy Eating and Active Living Web highlights some


forces that can a ect our intended goals and the key elements
needed for all of us to make healthy eating and active living a way
of life. (See figure 8.1.)
   As you can see from the illustration, your social environment—
friends and family who share your commitment to healthy eating
and active living, work colleagues who understand and respect you
for taking time to eat a nourishing lunch or go on a walk during
your break—has a strong in uence on your daily ability to eat and
move mindfully. You also need support from your physical
environment: If you live in a neighborhood that is unsafe, without
adequate lighting, sidewalks, bike paths, parks, or trails for you to
bike or walk on, chances are that you will nd it much more
challenging for you and your family to bike, walk briskly, or jog at
will. By the same token, if you live in a “food desert”—a
neighborhood that does not have a supermarket—you may have to
rely on convenience stores or fast-food restaurants for your food and
drink. So instead of being able to easily buy fresh fruits and
vegetables and whole grains, you may have to choose your meals
from the highly processed, re ned carbohydrate-rich foods and the
high-sugar drinks that line the convenience-store shelves, or the
mega-portioned “meal deals” offered by the fast-food restaurants.
   Figure 8.1 THE HEALTHY EATING AND ACTIVE LIVING WEB


   Societal forces also in uence the healthy-eating, active-living
web. The food industry, ever seeking more pro t, controls what
foods are o ered in the marketplace. The advertising and media
industries shape how we view these foods. Agricultural policies
in uence what foods are most pro table for the food industry to
grow. A host of local and national policies also shape our access to
physical activity and our environment—architectural and zoning
policies, recreation and transportation policies. We need support
from all levels of the healthy-eating, active-living web in order for


us to change our daily habits for the better. This perspective is
described in greater detail in the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention’s recommendation for community strategies to
prevent obesity in the United States.3 A panel of experts identi ed
twenty-four strategies that can help communities create
environments that promote healthy eating and active living—among
them, improving access to supermarkets in underserved areas,
o ering incentives to produce food at local farms, improving public
transportation, and enhancing personal safety in places where
people would be physically active. (The complete article is
available               at              http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/
preview/mmwrhtml/rr5807a1.htm.)
   Note that the arrows in gure 8.1 go from the outer rings of the
web to the center as well as from the center to the outer rings. This
is a reminder that we are in uenced by our environment at many
levels but that we can also influence our environment.
Be an Agent of Change
As you look deeply at the Healthy Eating and Active Living Web,
the longer you contemplate it, the more you realize how many
people, businesses, organizations, and governments—at the local,
state, and national levels as well as globally—shape your ability to
follow a healthy-eating and active-living routine on a daily basis.
For many of us, healthy choices are not yet easy choices. When any
of these forces are not in line with our healthy-eating or active-
living goals, barriers and challenges arise. As Dr. Barry Popkin
recounts in his book The World Is Fat, technological changes,
globalization, government policies, and the food industry have
changed our diet and activity over the latter half of the twentieth
century. The culmination of all these changes: an unprecedented era
of unhealthy eating and sedentary living unlike anything seen
previously in our world, in which the number of people who are
overweight—1.6 billion—is more than double the number of
people who are undernourished.4 This dire state simply cannot


continue, given the economic and health burdens of obesity on
individuals, businesses, and countries. All of us can take part in
making our world healthier for many generations to come.
   This may seem like an overwhelming, daunting, and impossible
task, but each one of us can be an agent of change. Here are some
examples of inspiring grassroots e orts at social change led by
individuals or small groups of people.
From a Mother’s Tragedy to a Worldwide Campaign
After the death of her thirteen-year-old daughter to a repeat-
o ender drunk driver in 1980, Candace Lightner started a small
California grassroots organization that became Mothers Against
Drunk Driving (MADD), to address the problem of drunk driving.5
Instead of becoming immobilized by grief, she channeled her grief
and anger toward social action. Since then, MADD has become an
international organization with more than four hundred chapters
worldwide, dealing with drunk driving on multiple levels, from
working with city council task forces and state-level legislation to
working with a presidential commission on drunk driving. MADD’s
e orts ultimately led to changes in alcohol policy across all fty
states, including the raising of the legal drinking age and the
lowering of the drunk-driving blood-alcohol limit. Lightner’s story
shows the power that an individual has to make a di erence in the
world.
From Scientific Inquiry to a Healthier Food Supply
The successful minimization of trans fats in the U.S. food supply at
the dawn of the twenty-first century was initiated by the actions of a
small group of dedicated scientists. Chemists in the late nineteenth
century found they could change liquid vegetable oil into a solid
form by adding hydrogen atoms, a process called “partial
hydrogenation” that changes the healthy liquid oil into what is
known as trans fat.6 For food manufacturers, this solid form is much
more desirable for use in di erent types of foods such as baked


products and margarine, because it is more stable. It does not
become rancid easily like liquid vegetable oils, thereby prolonging
shelf life. Up until the early 1990s, most people thought that they
were reducing their risk of heart disease as long as they stayed away
from animal fats, as recommended by health professionals.
Margarine with partially hydrogenated oil was considered to be
heart healthy, since it does not contain cholesterol. This fact was
challenged as research emerged in 1990, when a landmark study by
Dr. Martin Katan and his colleagues published in the New England
Journal of Medicine showed that high levels of trans fat increase
LDL (“bad”) cholesterol almost as much as saturated fat and, unlike
saturated fat, decrease HDL (“good”) cholesterol. Since then, this
  nding has been replicated many times. Subsequently, in 1993
researchers in the Nurses’ Health Studies at Harvard University
found that trans fat is associated with coronary heart disease in
women. These scienti c ndings provided the evidence for the
Center for Science in the Public Interest, a public nutrition advocacy
group in the United States, to le a petition requesting that the
Food and Drug Administration require the inclusion of trans fats in
the nutrition labels of food products. Then in 1994, a research team
at the Harvard School of Public Health, led by Dr. Walter Willett,
surprised consumers when it found that trans fats are more
damaging than saturated fats and are likely to be responsible for at
least thirty thousand premature deaths each year in the United
States. With this nding, the major international food conglomerate
Unilever started to eliminate trans fat from margarine and spreads,
which required restructuring at numerous levels including farming,
processing, labeling, and advertising.
   Meanwhile, scientists continued to publish new ndings about
the adverse e ects of trans fats, pushing for the U.S. Dietary
Guidelines and Institute of Medicine reports to include the adverse
e ects of trans fats, while consumer groups continued to advocate
trans-fat labeling on food packages. Finally, the FDA ruled that as of
January 1, 2006, trans fat must be listed on food labels along with
other bad fats (saturated fats) and good ones (unsaturated fats). In


the wake of this ruling and the addition of one line on the food
label, food manufacturers and fast-food companies have been
overhauling all of their products to reduce or eliminate trans fat.
Numerous cities have now declared that restaurants must go trans-
fat free, including New York City, Boston, and Philadelphia,
reaching what the Center for Science in the Public Interest (CSPI)
estimates to be roughly 20 percent of the U.S. population.7 CSPI
also estimates that the amount of trans fat in the U.S. food supply
has declined by 50 percent since 2005. These sweeping changes
came about because of the dedicated e ort of a small group of
researchers on two continents working for nearly twenty years, as
well as persistent grassroots advocacy by health and consumer
education groups.
Sounding the Alarm on Sugary Drinks
We are far from reaching the public-health goal of getting everyone
to choose healthier beverages, but the social movement has begun.
The movement was ignited by the rst scienti c study indicating
that sugar-sweetened beverages increased the risk of obesity. The
2001 study was based on the work led by Dr. David Ludwig and his
colleagues at Harvard University and reported that drinking an
additional can of soda a day increased teens’ risk of becoming obese
by 60 percent.8 This study, which was widely reported in the press,
spurred parents all over the United States to speak up against
sugar-sweetened beverages in vending machines, especially in
elementary schools. Under pressure, the beverage industries
removed sugar-sweetened sodas in all their school contracts with
elementary schools in 2006.9
   Meanwhile, other studies reported increased risks of obesity,
diabetes, and heart disease among adults.10 These scienti c studies
provided further evidence for the need to control the public’s
consumption of sugar-sweetened beverages across the entire life
span. Insights from the success of the tobacco-control movement in
the United States suggest that multiple comprehensive strategies


need to be engaged. These inelude clinical intervention so that
doctors can help people lose weight; economic approaches such as
taxing sugary drinks; regulatory e orts such as limiting access to
sodas and sports drinks in schools; and educational strategies in
schools, at work sites, and in the media as well as at point of
purchase.11 We need to work to change the norms around sugary
drinks: Water should be the choice nearly all the time, and sugar-
sweetened soda should revert back to the “treat” status, something
to have once a while, as it was up until a few decades ago.
From a Life Cut Short, Countless Lives Are Saved
In 1986, Countess Albina du Boisrouvray lost her only child,
François-Xavier, who was twenty-four years old, during a helicopter
mission in Mali.12 Instead of feeling devastated and drowning in
deep sorrow, she decided to devote all her energy and resources to
humanitarian causes that perpetuate the values of generosity and
compassion that guided her son’s life. She founded the Association
François-Xavier Bagnoud (FXB International: www.fxb.org) by
selling most of her own possessions and getting her friends
involved. The mission of FXB, an international, nongovernmental
organization, is to ght poverty and AIDS and to support orphans
and vulnerable children left in the wake of the AIDS pandemic.
Understanding the importance of the individual and collective
contributions to a community, FXB o ers comprehensive support to
the families and communities that care for these children, assisting
in the planning and building of these communities to be self-
sustaining. FXB has over one hundred model programs in Africa,
the Americas, Asia, and Europe.
Three Mindful Farmers
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA) is a farm model in which
members of the surrounding communities buy shares in a farm; in
return, the members get produce and grains grown on that farm.
Apart from the exchange of money for fresh, locally grown, often


organic products, the CSA model builds important relationships
between the communities, the food, and the environment.
   There is a notable CSA farm in Santa Cruz, California—
Freewheelin’ Farm (www.freewheelinfarm.com)—that was started
by three young farmers with a vision to provide the community
with fresh, organically grown fruits and vegetables while caring for
the earth, water, environment, and people that make it all possible.
Besides practicing organic farming, they are committed to
innovative irrigation and resource consumption analysis, striving to
nurture their crops in the most sustainable and environmentally
friendly ways. They work to minimize petroleum consumption, and
they use recycled materials for all aspects of the farm. As their
name suggests, they express their commitment to a greener
environment by delivering fresh produce by bicycle!
   Beyond growing fresh, healthy food, Freewheelin’ Farm is
mindful of the need to enhance a collective awareness in the local
communities with regard to food, the environment, health,
community renewal, and social responsibility, especially in the
younger generation. They have developed programs to capture the
interests and participation of young people and have been
partnering with a youth-empowerment program in the school
system to o er hands-on farm training, sustainable-agriculture
education, and nutrition education.
   The vision of these three farmers is exemplary, and their overall
perspective on how to contribute to building a healthier community
is admirable. They clearly see the interdependent nature of the
land, the food, and the community, and the importance of engaging
young people in planting the seeds for our future. This is a
wonderful model that should be replicated in communities
throughout the world.
Change the World, Step-by-Step
Living in a healthy and supportive environment is a key part of
attaining a healthy weight. You may be wondering: What can I do


to support the healthy-eating and healthy-living movement? A good
place to start is in your immediate environment. What elements are
missing from your home environment, your workplace, and your
local community that prevent you from nurturing your body and
practicing healthy eating and active living? Chances are that the
issues we raised in chapters 5 and 6 have alerted you to the many
challenges and barriers you face. By now, you realize that you can’t
blame yourself solely for your past failures to reach your healthy
weight. There were many external forces shaping your behavior and
preventing you from reaching your goals. Re ect deeply on these
challenges and barriers, because understanding them is important in
helping you reach your healthy weight and live a mindful life.
Everything can begin with you. You are the foundation of any
change that will happen in your society. A student asked Thay,
“There are so many urgent problems. What should I do?” Thay
answered calmly, “Take one thing, and do it very deeply and
carefully, and you will be doing everything at the same time.”
   Knowing that sugar-sweetened beverages are a foe to our weight
goals, what can we do to control their consumption? Many of us
may say that we just need willpower—that we just need to decide
to not drink these beverages. But willpower is likely to be short-
lived, especially when we are immersed in an environment that
provides easy access to sweet, supersize drinks of twenty ounces a
bottle or more. On top of that, we are bombarded with
advertisements enticing us to gulp down these drinks. Take action
so that you can safeguard yourself from these unhealthy choices.
   Start with your immediate environment, your home. Don’t keep
sugar-sweetened beverages in your fridge. Instead, reconnect to the
refreshing taste of tea or water avored with lime, lemon, orange
slices, or mint. When you are thirsty, drink water mindfully and you
will discover how refreshing it is. At the cafeteria at work, ask the
food-service manager to stock healthier drinks of avored water
and ones that are much lower in sugar—up to three teaspoons per
twelve ounces, as recommended by researchers at the Harvard
School of Public Health.13 Do the same for your neighborhood


convenience store. Petition, call, or e-mail the consumer hotlines at
all the major beverage companies such as Coca-Cola, PepsiCo, and
Schweppes or the manufacturer of any of your favorite drinks and
ask them to create a lower-sugar drink of up to three teaspoons of
sugar per twelve ounces. All businesses are consumer driven. They
respond to customer demands. The more consumer requests the
beverage industries receive, the more likely it is that they will
commit to introducing new products.
   You really enjoy riding the bike for your errands around town,
but you are worried about safety, since the streets are busy with
tra c and there is no bike path. Speak up at your local town
meetings, and ask for bike paths to be built. You have already paid
taxes to your town, and you have the right to request a safe
environment for routine activities. Get your neighbors and friends to
do the same, and be persistent. Don’t be surprised if your advocacy
e ort for the bike path encounters some resistance from town
o cials, who are concerned about costs, or even from some other
residents, who may initially see only potential negatives. Find like-
minded neighbors to help you get the word out about a bike path’s
many bene ts: A bike path will make families feel more at ease
when their children ride their bikes around town, and it will also
help reduce your neighborhood’s carbon footprint and improve its
air quality. Your action will bring the light of mindfulness to your
town’s elected o cials, helping them act on their good intentions
for the well-being of all.
   Don’t underestimate the power of mindful action. You can be a
change agent for a healthier environment and for the future. To
improve your environment and support healthy eating and active
living, there are many needs and options. Take a look at the list of
suggestions by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in the
United States.14 (See appendix E.) Focus on one area that you are
drawn to and passionate about in bringing about change in your
community, in your state, or even at the national level. It can be
working to bring farmers’ markets to your community or
revitalizing your community’s parks and playgrounds so that


children and families can play safely. Or it can be calling the
consumer hotlines of food manufacturers and restaurant chains to
request healthier choices. There are numerous Web-based resources
that give you ideas and help you change the world around you.
   To gain more insight and get more ideas on how to promote
social change, so that healthy eating and active living can be a
reality for all, visit the Web sites of the Center for Science in the
Public Interest, in the United States (http://www.cspinet.org); the
Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity, at Yale University
(http://www.yaleruddcenter.org); the Canadian Obesity Network
(http://obesitynetwork.ca); Sustain—The Alliance for Better Food
and Farming, in the United Kingdom (http://www.sustainweb.org);
the        Parents         Jury,       based       in        Australia
(http://www.parentsjury.org.au); Fight the Obesity Epidemic, based
in New Zealand (http://www.foe.org.nz); and the International
Obesity Task Force (http://www.iotf.org). You can see more ideas
for social action at this book’s Web site
(http://www.savorthebook.com).
   In your Mindful Living Plan, include a goal to participate actively
in a community-based organization that is focused on improving
foods and drinks or your environment. You will be helping not only
to improve your community but also to improve your chances of
sticking with your own healthy-lifestyle goals as you become
surrounded by like-minded volunteers.
Every Day Is a Thanksgiving Day
Every year on the third Thursday of November, Americans celebrate
the national holiday of Thanksgiving, which has its roots in the
centuries-old Native American tradition of celebrating and giving
thanks for the harvest. With our realization of the interdependent
nature of what and who are needed so that we can eat well and
stay active every day, Thanksgiving should be celebrated not just
once a year. It should be celebrated more frequently—like … every
day. Make a habit of thanking silently all those whom you are


connected to and dependent on, be it your spouse who prepared a
healthy, delicious meal; the dedicated researchers who discovered
the scienti c wisdom on healthy eating; the cashier at the lunch
line; the food businesses that o er us the healthy choices we need;
the radio reporter announcing the farm bill that has just passed in
Congress; the representatives and senators who worked tirelessly to
pass legislature to improve our diets; or the physician who
encouraged you to work toward a healthier weight. When we are in
touch with our gratitude for all of these people, we will be inspired
and energized to act and do our part to contribute to improving our
own health and quality of life and that of many others.
Savor Every Moment
None of us lives forever. While we are alive, all of us have the
choice to live a life of mindfulness, leading to more peace and joy
—or to live a life without mindfulness, leading to more anxiety and
su ering. Every day, it is important to remind ourselves that all
notions, things, and people are impermanent. That sickness and loss
are inevitable. And that we need to live in the moment to be truly
ful lled. The Buddha encouraged his students to practice and re ect
regularly on these Five Remembrances:
              I am of the nature to grow old. There is no way to escape growing
           old.
              I am of the nature to have ill-health. There is no way to escape
           having ill-heath.
              I am of the nature to die. There is no way to escape death.
              All that is dear to me and everyone I love are of the nature to
           change. There is no way to escape being separated from them.
              My actions are my only true belongings. I cannot escape the
           consequences of my actions. My actions are the ground on which I
           stand.15
   Savor the time you still have in this life. Savor every moment,
every breath, every meal, every relationship, every action or


nonaction, every opportunity to maintain your well-being and the
well-being of our world. Integrate and practice mindfulness in your
everyday living so that it becomes a habit, a way of life. Get others
to join you, lending support to each other to eat, work, and live
mindfully together. Living like this is your only true belonging and
is the essence of a meaningful and fulfilling life.




NOTES
Chapter 1: Ending Your Struggle with Weight


Chapter 1: Ending Your Struggle with Weight
1. C. L. Ogden et al., Prevalence of overweight and obesity in the
    United States, 1999–2004, JAMA 295 (2006): 1549–55.
2. D. A. Kessler, The End of Overeating: Taking Control of the
    Insatiable American Appetite (New York: Rodale, 2009).
3. The Nielsen Company, NielsenWire, Ad Spending Down 11.5
    Percent in First Three Quarters of 2009. Updated December 10,
    2009. Accessed December 18, 2009.
    http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/consumer/ad-spending-in-
    u-s-down-11-5-percent-in-first-three-quarters-of-2009/.
4. NielsenWire, More than half the homes in U.S. have three or
    more TVs (2009),
    http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/media_entertainment/more-
    than-half-the-homes-in-us-have-three-or-more-tvs/.
5. Marketdata Enterprises. Press release: Diet Market Worth $58.6
    Billion in U.S. Last Year, but Growth Is Flat, Due to the
    Recession. Tampa FL, February 16, 2009.
    http://www.marketdataenterprises.com/pressreleases/DietMkt2009Press
    Release.pdf. Accessed November 30, 2009.
6. R. S. Padwal and S. R. Majumdar. Drug treatments for obesity:
    orlistat, sibutramine, and rimonabant, Lancet (2007); 369:71–
    77.11.
7. T. N. Hanh, The Heart of the Buddha’s Teaching (Berkeley, CA:
    Parallax Press, 1998).
8. T. N. Hanh. Thich Nhat Hanh 2008 Calendar. Brush Dance, San
    Rafael, CA.
9. A. Anandacoomarasamy et al., The impact of obesity on the
    musculoskeletal system, Int J Obes 32 (2007): 211–22.
10. K. M. McClean et al., Obesity and the lung: 1. Epidemiology,
    Thorax 63 (2008): 649–54.
11. D. P. Guh et al., The incidence of co-morbidities related to
    obesity and overweight: A systematic review and meta-analysis,
    BMC Public Health 9 (2005): 88 doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-9-88.
12. World Cancer Research Fund, American Institute for Cancer
    Research, Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention
    of Cancer: A Global Perspective (Washington, DC: AICR, 2007).
13. F. B. Hu, Obesity Epidemiology. (New York: Oxford University
    Press, 2008).
14. J. R. Loret de Mola, Obesity and its relationship to infertility
    in men and women. Obstet Gynecol Clin North Am, 36(2)
    (2009): 333–46, ix.


15. N. Cheung and T. Y. Wong, Obesity and eye diseases, Survey of
    Ophthalmology 52 (2007): 180–95.
16. M. A. Beydoun and Y. W. Hab, Obesity and central obesity as
    risk factors for incident dementia and its subtypes: A systematic
    review and meta-analysis, Obesity Reviews 9 (2008): 204–18.
17. K. F. Adams et al., Overweight, obesity, and mortality in a
    large prospective cohort of persons 50 to 71 years old, N Engl
    J Med 355 (2006): 763–78.
18. J. E. Manson et al., Body weight and mortality among women,
    N Engl J Med 333 (1995): 677–85.
19. R. M. Puhl and K. D. Brownell, Psychosocial origins of obesity
    stigma: Toward changing a powerful and pervasive bias,
    Obesity Reviews 4 (2003): 213–27. R. M. Puhl and J. D. Latner,
    Stigma, obesity, and the health of the nation’s children.
    Psychology Bulletin 133 (2007): 557–80.
20. R. C. Whitaker et al., Predicting obesity in young adulthood
    from childhood and parental obesity, N Engl J Med 337
    (1997): 869–73.
21. J. K. Lake, C. Power, and T. J. Cole, Child to adult body mass
    index in the 1958 British birth cohort: Associations with
    parental obesity, Arch Dis Child 77 (1997): 376–80. J. J. Reilly
    et al., Early life risk factors for obesity in childhood: Cohort
    study, BMJ 330 (2005): 1357.
22. T. Harder, R. Bergmann, G. Kallischnigg, and A. Plagemann,
    Duration of breastfeeding and risk of overweight: a meta-
    analysis, Am J Epidemiol (2005); 162: 397–403.
23. D. S. Ludwig, K. E. Peterson, and S. L. Gortmaker, Relation
    between consumption of sugar-sweetened drinks and childhood
    obesity: A prospective, observational analysis, Lancet 357
    (2001): 505–8.
24. M. B. Schulze et al., Sugar-sweetened beverages, weight gain,
    and incidence of type 2 diabetes in young and middle-aged
    women, JAMA 292 (2004): 927–34.
25. L. R. Vartanian, M. B. Schwartz, and K. D. Brownell, Effects of
    soft drink consumption on nutrition and health: A systematic
    review and meta-analysis, Am J Public Health 97 (2007): 667–
    75.
26. F. B. Hu et al., Television watching and other sedentary
    behaviors in relation to risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes
    mellitus in women, JAMA 289 (2003): 1785–91.
27. S. R. Patel and F. B. Hu, Short sleep duration and weight gain:
    A systematic review, Obesity (Silver Spring) 16 (2008): 643–53.


28. S. R. Patel et al., Association between reduced sleep and
    weight gain in women, American Journal of Epidemiology 164
    (2006): 947–54.
29. Patel and Hu, Short sleep duration.
30. Patel and Hu, Short sleep duration.
31. K. L. Knutson and E. Cauter, Associations between sleep loss
    and increased risk of obesity and diabetes, Ann NY Acad Sci
    1129 (2008): 287–304.
32. K. Spiegel et al., Brief communication: Sleep curtailment in
    healthy young men is associated with decreased leptin levels,
    elevated ghrelin levels, and increased hunger and appetite,
    Annals of Internal Medicine 141 (2004) : 846.
33. B. J. Rolls, The supersizing of America: Portion size and the
    obesity epidemic, Nutr Today 38 (2003): 42–53.
34. B. Wansink and S. Park, At the movies: How external cues and
    perceived taste impact consumption volume, Food Quality and
    Preference 12 (2001): 69–74.
35. B. Wansink and M. M. Cheney, Super bowls: Serving bowl size
    and food consumption, JAMA 293 (2005): 1727–28.
36. B. Wansink and K. van Ittersum, Portion size me: Downsizing
    our consumption norms, Journal of the American Dietetic
    Association 107 (2007): 1103–6.
37. A. Bandura, Self-Efficacy: The Exercise of Control (New York:
    W. H. Freeman and Company, 1995).
38. R. R. Wing and J. O. Hill, Successful weight loss maintenance,
    Annu Rev Nutr 21 (2001): 323–41 S. Phelan, et al. Are the
    eating and exercise habits of successful weight losers changing?
    Obesity 14 (2006): 710–716. D. A. Raynor, et al. Television
    viewing and long-term weight maintenance: Results from the
    National Weight Control Registry, Obesity 14 (2006): 1816–24.


Chapter 2: Are You Really Appreciating the Apple? An Apple
Meditation
1. J. Mooallem, Twelve easy pieces, New York Times, February
    12, 2006.


Chapter 3: You Are More Than What You Eat
The epigraph is taken from the Sutra of the Son’s Flesh. The sutra is
included in its entirety in appendix B. For commentary on the sutra
from which the epigraph is taken, see Thich Nhat Hanh, The Path
of Emancipation (Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press, 2000), 84–91.
1. C. R. Gail et al., Breakfast habits, nutritional status, body
     weight, and academic performance in children and adolescents,
     Journal of the American Dietetic Association 105 (2005): 743–
     60.
2. J. J. Ratey, Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise
     and the Brain (Boston: Little, Brown & Company, 2008).
3. L. D. Kubzansky, Sick at heart: The pathophysiology of negative
     emotions, Cleve Clin J Med 74, suppl. 1 (2007): S67–S72.
4. M. Nestle, What to Eat (New York: North Point Press, 2006).
5. USDA Economic Research Service, Food CPI, Prices and
     Expenditures: Food Expenditures by Families and Individuals
     as a Share of Disposable Personal Income (Washington, DC,
     2008).
6. H. Steinfeld et al., Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental
     Issues and Options (Rome: Food and Agriculture Organization
     of the United Nations, 2006).
7. D. Pimentel and M. Pimentel, Sustainability of meat-based and
     plant-based diets and the environment, Am J Clin Nutr 78
     (2003): 660S–663S.
8. Pimentel and Pimentel, Sustainability.
9. U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Major Crops Grown in
     the United States.
     www.epa.gov/oecaagct/ag101/cropmajor.html. Last updated
     Thursday, September 10, 2009. Accessed December 19, 2009.
10. R. E. Black, L. H. Allen, Z. A. Bhutta, et al. Maternal and child
     undernutrition: Global and regional exposures and health
     consequences, Lancet (2008); 371: 243–260.
11. Pew Commission on Industrial Farm Animal Production,
     Putting Meat on the Table: Industrial Farm Animal Production
     in America (Washington, DC: Pew Charitable Trust and Johns
     Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public Health, 2008).
12. Pew Commission, Putting Meat on the Table.
13. Steinfeld et al., Livestock’s Long Shadow.
14. Steinfeld et al., Livestock’s Long Shadow.


15. Steinfeld et al., Livestock’s Long Shadow.
16. W. J. Craig, Health effects of vegan diets, Am J Clin Nutr 89
    (2009) : 1627S–1633S. G. E. Fraser, Vegetarian diets: What do
    we know of their effects on common chronic diseases? Am J
    Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1607S-1612S.
17. World Cancer Research Fund, American Institute for Cancer
    Research, Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention
    of Cancer: A Global Perspective (Washington, DC: AICR, 2007).
    R. Sinha et al., Meat intake and mortality: A prospective study
    of over half a million people, Arch Intern Med 169 (2009):
    562–71.
18. ZenithOptimedia, Press release: Global ad market to accelerate
    in 2008 despite credit squeeze (2007).
19. A. Mathews et al., The Marketing of Unhealthy Food to
    Children in Europe: A Report of Phase 1 of the Children,
    Obesity, and Associated Chronic Diseases Project (Brussels:
    European Heart Network, 2005).
20. V. Vicennati et al., Stress-related development of obesity and
    cortisol in women, Obesity 17 (2009): 1678–83. T. C. Adam
    and E. S. Epel, Stress, eating and the reward system, Physiology
    & Behavior 91 (2007): 449–58.


Chapter 4: Stop and Look: The Present Moment
1. T. N. Hanh, Transformation and Healing (Berkeley, CA:
    Parallax Press, 2006), p. 89.


Chapter 5: Mindful Eating
1. Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health, The
    Nutrition Source: Knowledge for Healthy Eating.
    http://www.thenutritionsource.org.
2. J. S. L. de Munter et al., Whole grain, bran, and germ intake
    and risk of type 2 diabetes: A prospective cohort study and
    systematic review, PLoS Medicine (4) 2007: e261. S. Liu et al.,
    Whole-grain consumption and risk of coronary heart disease:
    Results from the Nurses’ Health Study, Am J Clin Nutr 70
    (1999): 412–19. P. B. Mellen, T. F. Walsh, and D. M.
    Herrington, Whole grain intake and cardiovascular disease: A
    meta-analysis, Nutrition, Metabolism and Cardiovascular
    Diseases 18 (2008): 283–90.
3. A. Schatzkin et al., Dietary fiber and whole-grain consumption
    in relation to colorectal cancer in the NIH-AARP Diet and
    Health Study, Am J Clin Nutr 85 (2007): 1353–60.
4. V. S. Malik and F. B. Hu, Dietary prevention of atherosclerosis:
    Go with whole grains, Am J Clin Nutr 85 (2007): 1444–45.
5. L. Djousse et al., Egg consumption and risk of type 2 diabetes
    in men and women, Diabetes Care 32 (2009) 295–300. F. B.
    Hu et al., A prospective study of egg consumption and risk of
    cardiovascular disease in men and women, JAMA 281 (1999);
    1387–94.
6. Institute of Medicine, Dietary Reference Intakes for Energy,
    Carbohydrate, Fiber, Fat, Fatty Acids, Cholesterol, Protein, and
    Amino Acids (Macronutrients) (Washington, DC: The National
    Academies Press, 2005). W. J. Craig and A. R. Mangels, Position
    of the American Dietetic Association: Vegetarian diets. J Am
    Diet Assoc 109(7) (2009): 1266–82.
7. R. P. Mensink et al., Effects of dietary fatty acids and
    carbohydrates on the ratio of serum total to HDL cholesterol
    and on serum lipids and apolipoproteins: A meta-analysis of
    60 controlled trials, Am J Clin Nutr 77 (2003): 1146–55.
8. D. Mozaffarian, A. Aro, and W. C. Willett, Health effects of
    trans-fatty acids: Experimental and observational evidence, Eur
    J Clin Nutr 63 (2009): S5-S21. D. Mozaffarian et al., Trans fatty
    acids and cardiovascular disease, N Engl J Med 354 (2006):
    1601–13.
9. Mozaffarian, Aro, and Willett, Health effects of trans-fatty acids.
    D. Mozaffarian, Trans fatty acids: Effects on systemic
    inflammation and endothelial function, Atherosclerosis
    Supplements 7 (2006): 29–32.


10. Mozaffarian, Aro, and Willett, Health effects of trans-fatty
    acids.
11. E. W. T. Chong et al., Fat consumption and its association with
    age-related macular degeneration, Arch Ophthalmol 127
    (2009): 674–80.
12. D. Mozaffarian, Fish and n–3 fatty acids for the prevention of
    fatal coronary heart disease and sudden cardiac death, Am J
    Clin Nutr 87 (2008): 1991S–1996S.
13. P. C. Calder, n–3 polyunsaturated fatty acids, inflammation,
    and inflammatory diseases, Am J Clin Nutr 83 (2006) : S1505–
    S1519.
14. D. Mozaffarian and E. B. Rimm, Fish intake, contaminants, and
    human health: Evaluating the risks and the benefits, JAMA 296
    (2006): 1885–99. GISSI Prevenzione Investigators, Dietary
    supplementation with n–3 polyunsaturated fatty acids and
    vitamin E after myocardial infarction: Results of the GISSI-
    Prevenzione trial, Lancet 354 (1999): 447–55. M. Yokoyama et
    al., Effects of eicosapentaenoic acid on major coronary events
    in hypercholesterolaemic patients (JELIS): A randomised
    open-label, blinded endpoint analysis, Lancet 369 (2007):
    1090–98.
15. A. Baylin et al., Adipose tissue Alpha-linolenic acid and
    nonfatal acute myocardial infarction in Costa Rica, Circulation
    197 (2003): 1586–91. H. Campos, A. Baylin, and W. C. Willett,
    Alpha-linolenic acid and risk of nonfatal acute myocardial
    infarction, Circulation 118 (2008): 339–45.
16. F. M. Sacks et al., Comparison of weight-loss diets with
    different compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates, N
    Engl J Med 360 (2009): 859–73. I. Shai I et al., Weight loss
    with a low-carbohydrate, Mediterranean, or low-fat diet, N
    Engl J Med 359 (2008): 229–41.
17. F. B. Hu and W. C. Willett, Optimal diets for prevention of
    coronary heart disease, JAMA 288 (2002): 2569–78. M. B.
    Schulze and F. B. Hu, Primary prevention of diabetes: What can
    be done and how much can be prevented? Annual Review of
    Public Health 26 (2005): 445–67.
18. P. N. Singh, J. Sabate, and G. E. Fraser, Does low meat
    consumption increase life expectancy in humans? Am J Clin
    Nutr 78 (2003): 526S-532S.
19. T. J. Key et al., Mortality in British vegetarians: Results from
    the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
    Nutrition (EPIC-Oxford), Am J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1613S–
    1619S.


20. W. J. Craig, Health effects of vegan diets, Am J Clin Nutr
    (2009): 1627S-33S. G. E. Fraser, Vegetarian diets: What do we
    know of their effects on common chronic diseases? Am J Clin
    Nutr 89 (2009): 1607S–1612S.
21. T. J. Key et al., Cancer incidence in vegetarians: Results from
    the European Prospective Investigation into Cancer and
    Nutrition (EPIC-Oxford), Am J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1620S–
    1626S.
22. Craig, Health effects of vegan diets.
23. M. Jacobson, Six Arguments for a Greener Diet: How a Plant-
    Based Diet Could Save Your Health and the Environment
    (Washington, DC: Center for Science in the Public Interest,
    2006).
24. A. Vang et al., Meats, processed meats, obesity, weight gain
    and occurrence of diabetes among adults: Findings from
    Adventist Health Studies, Ann Nutr Metab 52 (2008): 96–104.
25. World Cancer Research Fund, American Institute for Cancer
    Research, Food, Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention
    of Cancer: A Global Perspective (Washington, DC: AICR, 2007).
26. R. Z. Stolzenberg-Solomon et al., Meat and meat-mutagen
    intake and pancreatic cancer risk in the NIH-AARP cohort,
    Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 16 (2007): 2664–75.
27. E. Linos et al., Red meat consumption during adolescence
    among premenopausal women and risk of breast cancer,
    Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 17 (2008): 2146–51.
28. T. T. Fung et al., Dietary patterns, meat intake, and the risk of
    type 2 diabetes in women, Archives of Internal Medicine 164
    (2004): 2235–40.
29. F. B. Hu et al., Prospective study of major dietary patterns and
    risk of coronary heart disease in men, Am J Clin Nutr 72
    (2000): 912–21.
30. T. T. Fung et al., Prospective study of major dietary patterns
    and stroke risk in women, Stroke 35 (2004): 2014–19.
31. R. Varraso et al., Prospective study of dietary patterns and
    chronic obstructive pulmonary disease among U.S. men,
    Thorax 62 (2007): 786–91.
32. C. Heidemann et al., Dietary patterns and risk of mortality
    from cardiovascular disease, cancer, and all causes in a
    prospective cohort of women, Circulation 118 (2008): 230–37.
33. A. Mente et al., A systematic review of the evidence
    supporting a causal link between dietary factors and coronary
    heart disease, Arch Intern Med 169 (2009): 659–69. T. T. Fung


    et al., Mediterranean diet and incidence of and mortality from
    coronary heart disease and stroke in women, Circulation 119
    (2009): 1093–1100. F. Sofi et al., Adherence to Mediterranean
    diet and health status: Meta-analysis, BMJ 337 (2008): 668–81.
    P. N. Mitrou et al., Mediterranean dietary pattern and
    prediction of all-cause mortality in a US population: Results
    from the NIH-AARP Diet and Health Study, Arch Intern Med
    167 (2007): 2461–68.
34.  World Cancer Research Fund, Food. L. Dauchet et al., Fruit and
    vegetable consumption and risk of coronary heart disease: A
    meta-analysis of cohort studies, J Nutr 136 (2006): 2588–93. F.
    J. He et al., Increased consumption of fruit and vegetables is
    related to a reduced risk of coronary heart disease: Meta-
    analysis of cohort studies, Journal of Human Hypertension 21
    (2007): 717–28. A.-H. Harding et al., Plasma vitamin C level,
    fruit and vegetable consumption, and the risk of new-onset
    type 2 diabetes mellitus: The European prospective
    investigation of cancer—Norfolk Prospective Study, Arch Intern
    Med 168 (2008): 1493–99. L. A. Bazzano et al., Intake of fruit,
    vegetables, and fruit juices and risk of diabetes in women,
    Diabetes Care 31 (2008): 1311–17.
35.  L. Brown et al., A prospective study of carotenoid intake and
    risk of cataract extraction in US men, Am J Clin Nutr 70
    (1999): 517–24. W. G. Christen et al., Fruit and vegetable
    intake and the risk of cataract in women, Am J Clin Nutr 81
    (2005): 1417–22. S. M. Moeller et al., Overall adherence to the
    dietary guidelines for Americans is associated with reduced
    prevalence of early age-related nuclear lens opacities in
    women, J Nutr 134 (2004): 1812–19. E. Cho et al., Prospective
    study of intake of fruits, vegetables, vitamins, and carotenoids
    and risk of age-related maculopathy, Arch Ophthalmol 122
    (2004): 883–92.
36.  Dauchet et al., Fruit and vegetable consumption. He et al.,
    Increased consumption of fruit and vegetables.
37.  Bazzano, Intake of Fruit.
38.  J. W. Anderson et al., Carbohydrate and fiber
    recommendations for individuals with diabetes: A quantitative
    assessment and meta-analysis of the evidence, J Am Coll Nutr
    23 (2004): 5–17. T. L. Halton et al., Low-carbohydrate-diet
    score and the risk of coronary heart disease in women, N Engl
    J Med 355 (2006): 1991–2002. J. W. Beulens et al., High
    dietary glycemic load and glycemic index increase risk of
    cardiovascular disease among middle-aged women: A
    population-based follow-up study, J Am Coll Cardiol 50
    (2007): 14–21.


39. K. C. Maki et al., Effects of a reduced-glycemic-load diet on
    body weight, body composition, and cardiovascular disease risk
    markers in overweight and obese adults, Am J Clin Nutr 85
    (2007): 724–34. C. B. Ebbeling et al., Effects of a lowglycemic
    load vs. low-fat diet in obese young adults: A randomized trial,
    JAMA 297 (2007): 2092–2102.
40. R. K. Johnson, L. J. Appel, M. Brands, et al. Dietary sugars
    intake and cardiovascular health: A scientific statement from
    the American Heart Association. Circulation 120 (2009): 1011–
    20.
41. D. E. Wallis, S. Penckofer, and G. W. Sizemore, The “sunshine
    deficit” and cardiovascular disease, Circulation 118 (2008):
    1476–85. M. F. Holick, Vitamin D: A D-lightful health
    perspective, Nutrition Reviews 66 (2008): S182–S194.
42. M. F. Holick, Vitamin D deficiency, N Engl J Med 357 (2007):
    266–81.
43. D. Feskanich, V. Singh, W. C. Willett, and G. A. Colditz.
    Vitamin A intake and hip fractures among postmenopausal
    women. JAMA 287 (2002): 47–54. K. Michaelsson, H. Lithell,
    B. Vessby, and H. Melhus. Serum retinol levels and the risk of
    fracture. N Engl J Med 348 (2003): 287–94. K. L. Penniston and
    S. A. Tanumihardjo. The acute and chronic toxic effects of
    vitamin A. Am J Clin Nutr 83 (2006): 191–201. V. Azais-
    Braesco and G. Pascal. Vitamin A in pregnancy: Requirements
    and safety limits. Am J Clin Nutr 71 (2000): 1325S-33S.
44. N. R. Cook et al., Long term effects of dietary sodium
    reduction on cardiovascular disease outcomes: Observational
    follow-up of the Trials of Hypertension Prevention (TOHP),
    BMJ 334 (2007): 885.
45. American Heart Association. News Releases. American Heart
    Association supports lower sodium limits for most Americans.
    March 26, 2009. Available at
    http://americanheart.mediaroom.com/index.php?
    s=43&item=700. Accessed December 19, 2009. Centers for
    Disease Control and Prevention (CDC). Application of lower
    sodium intake recommendations to adults—United States,
    1999–2006. MMWR Morbity and Mortality Weekly Report 58
    (2009): 281–83.
46. Center for Science in the Public Interest, Xtreme Eating Awards
    2009 (2009),
    http://www.cspinet.org/new/200906021.html.
47. K. He et al., Association of monosodium glutamate intake with
    overweight in Chinese adults: The INTERMAP study, Obesity 16
    (2008): 1875–80.


48. He et al., Association of monosodium glutamate intake.
49. W. C. Willett and P. Skerrett, Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy: The
    Harvard Medical School Guide to Healthy Eating (New York:
    Free Press/Simon & Schuster, 2005).
50. E. Cho et al., Dairy foods, calcium, and colorectal cancer: A
    pooled analysis of 10 cohort studies, Journal of the National
    Cancer Institute 96 (2004): 1015–22.
51. W. Owusu et al., Calcium intake and the incidence of forearm
    and hip fractures among men, Journal of Nutrition 127 (1997):
    1782–87. D. Feskanich et al., Milk, dietary calcium, and bone
    fractures in women: A 12-year prospective study, American
    Journal of Public Health 87 (1997): 992–97. H. A. Bischoff-
    Ferrari et al., Calcium intake and hip fracture risk in men and
    women: A meta-analysis of prospective cohort studies and
    randomized controlled trials, Am J Clin Nutr 86 (2007): 1780–
    90.
52. World Cancer Research Fund, Food. J. M. Genkinger et al.,
    Dairy products and ovarian cancer: A pooled analysis of 12
    cohort studies, Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers and
    Prevention 15 (2006): 364–72. E. Giovannucci et al., Risk
    factors for prostate cancer incidence and progression in the
    health professionals follow-up study, International Journal of
    Cancer 121 (2007): 1571–78. E. Giovannucci et al., Calcium
    and fructose intake in relation to risk of prostate cancer, Cancer
    Research 58 (1998): 442–47.
53. M. B. Schulze et al., Sugar-sweetened beverages, weight gain,
    and incidence of type 2 diabetes in young and middle-aged
    women, JAMA 292 (2004): 927–34. V. S. Malik, M. B. Schulze,
    and F. B. Hu, Intake of sugar-sweetened beverages and weight
    gain: A systematic review, Am J Clin Nutr 84 (2006): 274–88.
    V. S. Malik, W. C. Willett, and F. B. Hu, Sugar-sweetened
    beverages and BMI in children and adolescents: Reanalyses of a
    meta-analysis, Am J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 438–39; author reply,
    439–40. L. R. Vartanian, M. B. Schwartz, and K. D. Brownell,
    Effects of soft drink consumption on nutrition and health: A
    systematic review and meta-analysis, Am J Public Health 97
    (2007): 667–75. T. T. Fung et al., Sweetened beverage
    consumption and risk of coronary heart disease in women, Am
    J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1037–42. J. R. Palmer et al., Sugar-
    sweetened beverages and incidence of type 2 diabetes mellitus
    in African American women, Arch Intern Med 168 (2008):
    1487–92.
54. Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health,
    How sweet is it? (2009),
    http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/healthy-


    drinks/how-sweet-is-it/.
55. R. M. van Dam et al., Coffee, caffeine, and risk of type 2
    diabetes: A prospective cohort study in younger and middle-
    aged U.S. women, Diabetes Care 29 (2006): 398–403. S.
    Kuriyama et al., Green tea consumption and mortality due to
    cardiovascular disease, cancer, and all causes in Japan: The
    Ohsaki study, JAMA 296 (2006): 1255–65.
56. World Cancer Research Fund, Food. U.S. Department of
    Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines for Americans 2005
    (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Agriculture, 2005).
57. J. Rehm et al., Global burden of disease and injury and
    economic cost attributable to alcohol use and alcohol-use
    disorders, Lancet 373 (2009): 2223–33.
58. I. J. Goldberg et al., AHA Science Advisory: Wine and your
    heart: A science advisory for healthcare professionals from the
    Nutrition Committee, Council on Epidemiology and
    Prevention, and Council on Cardiovascular Nursing of the
    American Heart Association, Circulation 103 (2001): 472–75. L.
    L. Koppes et al., Moderate alcohol consumption lowers the risk
    of type 2 diabetes: A metaanalysis of prospective observational
    studies, Diabetes Care 28 (2005): 719–25. K. M. Conigrave et
    al., A prospective study of drinking patterns in relation to risk
    of type 2 diabetes among men, Diabetes 50 (2001): 2390–95.
    L. Djousse et al., Alcohol consumption and type 2 diabetes
    among older adults: The Cardiovascular Health Study, Obesity
    (Silver Spring) 15 (2007): 1758–65.
59. World Cancer Research Fund, Food.
60. U.S. Department of Agriculture, Dietary Guidelines.
61. N. W. Gilpin and G. F. Koob, Neurobiology of alcohol
    dependence: Focus on motivational mechanisms, Alcohol
    Research & Health 31 (2008): 185–95.
62. L. Fontana and S. Klein, Aging, adiposity, and calorie
    restriction, JAMA 297 (2007): 986–94. L. K. Heilbronn et al.,
    Effect of 6-month calorie restriction on biomarkers of longevity,
    metabolic adaptation, and oxidative stress in overweight
    individuals: A randomized controlled trial, JAMA 295 (2006):
    1539–48.
63. G. Eshel and P. A. Martin, Diet, energy, and global warming,
    Earth Interactions 10 (2006):1–17.
64. C. L. Weber and H. S. Matthews, Food-miles and the relative
    climate impacts of food choices in the United States,
    Environmental Science & Technology 42 (2008): 3508–13.


65. K. Glanz et al., Psychosocial correlates of healthful diets among
    male auto workers, Cancer Epidemiol Biomarkers Prev 7
    (1998): 119–26. A. R. Shaikh et al., Psychosocial predictors of
    fruit and vegetable consumption in adults: A review of the
    literature, Am J Prev Med 34 (2008): 535–43. J. G. Sorensen et
    al., The influence of social context on changes in fruit and
    vegetable consumption: Results of the healthy directions
    studies, American Journal of Public Health 97 (2007): 1216–
    27.
66. J. F. Sallis and K. Glanz, Physical activity and food
    environments: Solutions to the obesity epidemic, Milbank
    Quarterly 87 (2009): 123–54.
67. Sallis and Glanz, Physical activity and food environments.
68. M. S. Townsend et al., Less-energy-dense diets of low-income
    women in California are associated with higher energy-adjusted
    diet costs, Am J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1220–26. M. Maillot et
    al., Low energy density and high nutritional quality are each
    associated with higher diet costs in French adults, Am J Clin
    Nutr 86 (2007): 690–96. A. Drewnowski and N. Darmon, The
    economics of obesity: Dietary energy density and energy cost,
    Am J Clin Nutr 82 (2005): 265S-73S. H. Schroder, J. Marrugat,
    and M. I. Covas, High monetary costs of dietary patterns
    associated with lower body mass index: A population-based
    study, Int J Obes 30 (2006): 1574–79.
69. A. K. Kant and B. I. Graubard, Secular trends in patterns of self-
    reported food consumption of adult Americans: NHANES
    1971–1975 to NHANES 1999–2002, Am J Clin Nutr 84 (2006):
    1215–23. P. S. Haines, D. K. Guilkey, and B. Popkin, Trends in
    breakfast consumption in US adults between 1965 and 1991,
    Journal of the American Dietetic Association 96 (1996): 464–
    70.
70. W. O. Song et al., Is consumption of breakfast associated with
    body mass index in US adults? Journal of the American
    Dietetic Association 105 (2005): 1373–82. M. T. Timlin et
    al., Breakfast eating and weight change in a 5-year prospective
    analysis of adolescents: Project EAT (Eating Among Teens),
    Pediatrics 121 (2008): e638–e645. M. T. Timlin and M. A.
    Pereira, Breakfast frequency and quality in the etiology of adult
    obesity and chronic diseases, Nutrition Reviews 65 (2007):
    268–81. A. A. W. A. van der Heijden et al., A prospective study
    of breakfast consumption and weight gain among U.S. men,
    Obesity 15 (2007): 2463–69.
71. H. R. Wyatt et al., Long-term weight loss and breakfast in
    subjects in the National Weight Control Registry, Obesity 10
    (2002): 78–82.


72. Timlin and Pereira, Breakfast frequency and quality. W. A. M.
    Blom et al., Effect of a high-protein breakfast on the
    postprandial ghrelin response, Am J Clin Nutr 83 (2006): 211–
    20.
73. H. M. Seagle et al., Position of the American Dietetic
    Association: Weight management, Journal of the American
    Dietetic Association 109 (2009): 330–46.
74. R. Stuart and B. Davis, Slim Chance in a Fat World
    (Champaign, IL: Research Press, 1972).
75. T. A. Spiegel, Rate of intake, bites, and chews: The
    interpretation of lean-obese differences, Neuroscience &
    Biobehavioral Reviews 24 (2000): 229–37. C. K. Martin et al.,
    Slower eating rate reduces the food intake of men, but not
    women: Implications for behavioral weight control, Behaviour
    Research and Therapy 45 (2007): 2349–59. R. G. Laessle, S.
    Lehrke, and S. Dückers, Laboratory eating behavior in obesity,
    Appetite 49 (2007): 399–404.
76. A. M. Andrade, G. W. Greene, and K. J. Melanson, Eating
    slowly led to decreases in energy intake within meals in
    healthy women, Journal of the American Dietetic Association
    108 (2008): 1186–91.
77. K. Maruyama et al., The joint impact on being overweight of
    self reported behaviours of eating quickly and eating until full:
    Cross sectional survey. BMJ 337 (2008): a2002. R. Otsuka et
    al., Eating fast leads to obesity: Findings based on self-
    administered questionnaires among middle-aged Japanese men
    and women, Journal of Epidemiology 16 (2006): 117–24. S.
    Sasaki et al., Self-reported rate of eating correlates with body
    mass index in 18-year-old Japanese women, Int J Obes Relat
    Metab Disord 27 (2003): 1405–10.
78. B. Wansink, Environmental factors that increase the food
    intake and consumption volume of unknowing consumers,
    Annu Rev Nutr 24 (2004): 455–79. B. Wansink and S. Park, At
    the movies: How external cues and perceived taste impact
    consumption volume, Food Quality and Preference 12 (2000):
    69–74. B. Wansink, K. van Ittersum, and J. E. Painter, Ice cream
    illusions: Bowls, spoons, and self-served portion sizes,
    American Journal of Preventive Medicine 31 (2006) : 240–43.
79. L. R. Young and M. Nestle, The contribution of expanding
    portion sizes to the US obesity epidemic, American Journal of
    Public Health 92 (2002): 246–49. S. J. Nielsen and B. M.
    Popkin, Patterns and trends in food portion sizes, 1977–1998,
    JAMA 289 (2003): 450–53. B. Wansink and C. R. Payne, The
    joy of cooking too much: 70 years of calorie increases in classic


    recipes, Ann Intern Med 150 (2009): 291–92.
80. B. Wansink and K. van Ittersum, Portion size me: Downsizing
    our consumption norms, Journal of the American Dietetic
    Association 107 (2007): 1103–06.
81. Wansink, Environmental factors.
82. Wansink, Environmental factors.
83. P. Chandon and B. Wansink, The biasing health halos of fast
    food restaurant health claims: Lower calorie estimates and
    higher side-dish consumption intentions, Journal of Consumer
    Research 34 (2007): 301–14.
84. A. Stunkard, K. Allison, and J. Lundgren, Issues for DSM-V:
    Night eating syndrome, Am J Psychiatry 165 (2008): 424. K. C.
    Allison et al., Proposed diagnostic criteria for night eating
    syndrome. Int J Eat Disord (2009). E-publication ahead of
    print. DOI 10.1002/eat.20693.
85. Stunkard, Allison, and Lundgren, Issues for DSM-V.
86. M. E. Gluck, A. Geliebter, and T. Satov, Night eating syndrome
    is associated with depression, low self-esteem, reduced daytime
    hunger, and less weight loss in obese outpatients, Obes Res 9
    (2001): 264–67.
87. Wansink, Environmental factors.
88. L. A. Pawlow, P. M. O’Neil, and R. J. Malcolm, Night eating
    syndrome: Effects of brief relaxation training on stress, mood,
    hunger, and eating patterns, Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 27
    (2003): 970–78.
89. U.S. Department Labor, U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics,
    Consumer Expenditures in 2007 (Washington, DC, 2009).
90. J. F. Guthrie, B. H. Lin, and E. Frazao, Role of food prepared
    away from home in the American diet, 1977–78 versus 1994–
    96: Changes and consequences, J Nutr Educ Behav 34 (2002):
    140–50.
91. Wansink, Environmental factors.
92. N. Welch et al., Is the perception of time pressure a barrier to
    healthy eating and physical activity among women? Public
    Health Nutrition 12 (2009): 888–95. N. I. Larson et al., Food
    preparation by young adults is associated with better diet
    quality, Journal of the American Dietetic Association 106
    (2006): 2001–7. J. Jabs and C. M. Devine, Time scarcity and
    food choices: An overview, Appetite 47 (2006): 196–204.
93. A. A. Gorin et al., Promoting long-term weight control: Does
    dieting consistency matter? Int J Obes Relat Metab Disord 28


    (2003): 278–81.
94. M. L. Butryn et al., Consistent self-monitoring of weight: A key
    component of successful weight loss maintenance. Obesity
    (Silver Spring) 15(12) (2007): 3091–6. K. N. Boutelle et al.,
    How can obese weight controllers minimize weight gain during
    the high risk holiday season? By self-monitoring very
    consistently, Health Psychology 18 (1999): 364–68. J. F. Hollis
    et al., Weight loss during the intensive intervention phase of
    the Weight-Loss Maintenance Trial, American Journal of
    Preventive Medicine 35 (2008): 118–26.
95. L. Zepeda and D. Deal, Think before you eat: Photographic
    food diaries as intervention tools to change dietary decision
    making and attitudes, International Journal of Consumer
    Studies 32 (2008): 692–98.
96. D. L. Helsel, J. M. Jakicic, and A. D. Otto, Comparison of
    techniques for self-monitoring eating and exercise behaviors on
    weight loss in a correspondence-based intervention, Journal of
    the American Dietetic Association 107 (2007): 1807–10.
97. M. F. Dallman, Stress-induced obesity and the emotional
    nervous system. Trends Endocrinol Metab, 2009,
    doi:10.1016/j.tem.2009.10.004.K.Elfhag and S. Rossner, Who
    succeeds in maintaining weight loss? A conceptual review of
    factors associated with weight-loss maintenance and weight
    regain. Obes Rev 6(1) (2005): 67–85. R. M. Masheb and C. M.
    Grilo, Emotional overeating and its associations with eating
    disorder psychopathology among overweight patients with
    binge eating disorder. Int J Eat Disord 39(2) (2006): 141–6.
98. M. Faith, D. B. Allison, and A. Gelleibter, Emotional eating and
    obesity: Theoretical considerations and practical
    recommendations, in Overweight and Weight Management:
    The Health Professional’s Guide to Understanding and Practice,
    ed. S. Dalton (Sudbury, MA: Jones and Bartlett, 1997), 455. K.
    Elfhag and S. Rossner, Who succeeds in maintaining weight
    loss?: 67–85.


Chapter 6: Mindful Moving
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2001–2007 state
    physical activity statistics (2007),
    http://apps.nccd.cdc.gov/PASurveillance/StateSumV.asp.
2. U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical
    Activity Guidelines for Americans: Be Active, Healthy, and
    Happy! (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
    Human Services, 2008).
3. K. H. Cooper and T. C. Cooper, Start Strong, Finish Strong:
    Prescriptions for a Lifetime of Great Health (New York:
    Penguin Group, 2007).
4. J. J. Ratey, Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise
    and the Brain (Boston: Little, Brown & Company, 2008).
5. S. Begley, Train Your Mind, Change Your Brain (New York:
    Ballantine Books, 2008).
6. D. J. Siegel, The Mindful Brain (New York: Norton, 2007).
7. K. Shaw et al., Exercise for overweight or obesity, Cochrane
    Database of Systematic Reviews (2006).
8. Cooper and Cooper, Start Strong, Finish Strong.
9. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical
    Activity Guidelines.
10. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical
    Activity Guidelines.
11. American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines for
    Exercise Testing and Prescription (Philadelphia: Lippincott
    Williams & Wilkins, 2006).
12. T. Hanh and W. Vriezen, Mindful Movements: Ten Exercises
    for Well-Being (Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press, 2008).
13. American College of Sports Medicine, ACSM’s Guidelines.
14. J. E. Donnelly et al., The effects of 18 months of intermittent
    vs. continuous exercise on aerobic capacity, body weight and
    composition, and metabolic fitness in previously sedentary,
    moderately obese females, Int J Obes Rela Metab Disord 24
    (2000): 566. J. M. Jakicic et al., Effects of intermittent exercise
    and use of home exercise equipment on adherence, weight loss,
    and fitness in overweight women: A randomized trial, JAMA
    282 (1999): 1554–60.
15. Donnelly et al., Effects of 18 months. Jakicic et al., Effects of
    intermittent exercise.


16. Shaw et al., Exercise for overweight or obesity.
17. W. C. Miller, D. M. Koceja, and E. J. Hamilton, A meta-analysis
    of the past 25 years of weight loss research using diet, exercise
    or diet plus exercise intervention, Int J Obes Rela Metab Disord
    21 (1997): 941–47. J. M. Jakicic et al., American College of
    Sports Medicine position stand: Appropriate intervention
    strategies for weight loss and prevention of weight regain for
    adults, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 33 (2001):
    2145–56.
18. Jakicic et al., American College of Sports Medicine position
    stand. J. E. Donnelly et al., American College of Sports
    Medicine Position Stand: Appropriate physical activity
    intervention strategies for weight loss and prevention of weight
    regain for adults, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 41
    (2009): 459–71.
19. Jakicic et al., American College of Sports Medicine position
    stand. Donnelly et al., Effects of 18 months.
20. V. A. Catenacci et al., Physical activity patterns in the National
    Weight Control Registry, Obesity (Silver Spring) 16 (2008):
    153–61.
21. The Nielsen Company, Nielsen Wire, Average TV Viewing for
    2008–09 TV Season at All-Time High.
    http://blog.nielsen.com/nielsenwire/media_entertainment/average-
    tv-viewing-for-2008–09-tv-season-at-all-time-high/. Updated
    November 10, 2009; accessed November 30, 2009. The Nielsen
    Company, Historical daily viewing activity among households
    & persons 2+. Available at http://blog
    nielsen.com/nielsenwire/wp-
    content/uploads/2009/11/historicalviewing.pdf. Updated
    November 10, 2009; accessed November 30, 2009.
22. L. A. Tucker and M. Bagwell, Television viewing and obesity
    in adult females, Am J Public Health 81 (1991): 908–11. L. A.
    Tucker and G. M. Friedman, Television viewing and obesity in
    adult males, Am J Public Health 79 (1989): 516–18.
23. F. B. Hu et al., Television watching and other sedentary
    behaviors in relation to risk of obesity and type 2 diabetes
    mellitus in women, JAMA 289 (2003): 1785–91.
24. Hu et al., Television watching. F. Kronenberg et al., Influence
    of leisure time physical activity and television watching on
    atherosclerosis risk factors in the NHLBI Family Heart Study,
    Atherosclerosis 153 (2000): 433–43. G. N. Healy et al.,
    Television time and continuous metabolic risk in physically
    active adults, Medicine & Science in Sports & Exercise 40
    (2008): 639–45.


25. E. M. Blass et al., On the road to obesity: Television viewing
    increases intake of high-density foods, Physiol Behav 88 (2006):
    597–604.
26. M. Scully, H. Dixon, and M. Wakefield, Association between
    commercial television exposure and fast-food consumption
    among adults, Public Health Nutr 12 (2009): 105–10.
27. S. A. Bowman, Television-viewing characteristics of adults:
    Correlations to eating practices and overweight and health
    status, Prev Chronic Dis 3 (2006) : A38.
28. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, 2001–2007 State
    physical activity statistics.
29. F. F. Reichert et al., The role of perceived personal barriers to
    engagement in leisure-time physical activity, American Journal
    of Public Health 97 (2007): 515–19. W. C. Stutts, Physical
    activity determinants in adults: Perceived benefits, barriers, and
    self-efficacy, AAOHN Journal 50 (2002): 499–507.
30. N. E. Sherwood and R. W. Jeffery, The behavioral
    determinants of exercise: Implications for physical activity
    interventions, Annual Review of Nutrition 20 (2000): 21–44. D.
    M. Williams, E. S. Anderson, and R. A. Winett, A review of the
    outcome expectancy construct in physical activity research,
    Annals of Behavioral Medicine 29 (2005): 70–79.
31. Reichert et al., Role of perceived personal barriers. M. Stafford
    et al., Pathways to obesity: Identifying local, modifiable
    determinants of physical activity and diet, Social Science &
    Medicine 65 (2007): 1882–97. S. A. French, M. Story, and R. W.
    Jeffery, Environmental influences on eating and physical
    activity, Ann Rev Public Health 22 (2001): 309–35. J. F. Sallis
    and K. Glanz, Physical activity and food environments:
    Solutions to the obesity epidemic, Milbank Quarterly 87
    (2009): 123–54.
32. Jakicic et al., Effects of intermittent exercise.
33. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical
    Activity Guidelines for Americans.
34. Hanh and Vriezen, Mindful Movements.
35. L. A. Levine et al., Interindividual variation in posture
    allocation: Possible role in human obesity, Science 307 (2005):
    584–86.
36. T. Hanh, The World We Have (Berkeley, CA: Parallax Press,
    2008).


Chapter 7: Mindful Living Plan
1. M. Barry and J. M. Hughes, Talking dirty: The politics of clean
    water and sanitation, N Engl J Med 359 (2008): 784–87.
2. R. Tiernan, Best option is to clean and re-use waste, Financial
    Times, March 22, 2007, p. 13.
3. R. R. Wing and J. O. Hill, Successful weight loss maintenance,
    Annual Review of Nutrition 21 (2001): 323–41. J. A. Linde et
    al., Self-weighing in weight gain prevention and weight loss
    trials, Annals of Behavioral Medicine 30 (2005): 210–16.
4. K. N. Boutelle et al., How can obese weight controllers
    minimize weight gain during the high risk holiday season? By
    self-monitoring very consistently, Health Psychology 18 (1999):
    364–68. M. L. Butryn et al., Consistent self-monitoring of
    weight: A key component of successful weight loss
    maintenance, Obesity (Silver Spring) 15 (12) (2007): 3091–6.
    J. F. Hollis et al., Weight loss during the intensive intervention
    phase of the Weight-Loss Maintenance Trial, American Journal
    of Preventive Medicine 35 (2008): 118–26.
5. F. M. Sacks et al., Comparison of weight-loss diets with
    different compositions of fat, protein, and carbohydrates, N
    Engl J Med 360 (2009): 859–73.
6. K. D. Brownell et al., The effect of couples training and partner
    co-operativeness in the behavioral treatment of obesity, Behav
    Res Ther 16 (1978): 323–33.
7. A. A. Gorin et al., Weight loss treatment influences untreated
    spouses and the home environment: Evidence of a ripple effect.
    Int J Obes (London) 32 (2008): 1678–84.
8. N. A. Christakis and J. H. Fowler, The spread of obesity in a
    large social network over 32 years, N Engl J Med 357 (2007):
    370–79.
9. C. Thompson, Are your friends making you fat? New York
    Times, September 13, 2009, p. MM28.
10. WGBH Educational Foundation and Harvard Medical School
    Division of Sleep Medicine, Healthy Sleep: Understanding the
    third of our lives we so often take for granted,
    http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/healthy/.
11. M. G. Berman, J. Jonides, and S. Kaplan, The cognitive
    benefits of interacting with nature, Psychol Sci 19 (2008):
    1207–12. R. Kaplan, S. Kaplan, and R. Ryan, With People in
    Mind: Design and Management of Everyday Nature
    (Washington, DC: Island Press, 1998).


12. M. E. Larimer, R. S. Palmer, and G. A. Marlatt, Relapse
    prevention: An overview of Marlatt’s cognitive-behavioral
    model, Alcohol Res Health 23 (1999): 151–60.
13. G. A. Parks and G. A. Marlatt, Relapse prevention therapy: A
    cognitive-behavioral approach, National Psychologist vol. 9
    (2000): 22.
14. G. A. Parks and G. A. Marlatt, Relapse prevention.


Chapter 8: A Mindful World
1. Reprinted by permission. J. L. Levye. We are all connected.
    WickedLocal Sharon with News from the Sharon Advocate.
    June 8, 2007. Available at
    http://www.wickedlocal.com/sharon/news/lifestyle/columnists/x870110339. Accessed
    on November 30, 2009.
2. T. N. Hanh, Thich Nhat Hanh 2008 Calendar, Brush Dance, San
    Rafael, CA.
3. L. K. Khan et al., Recommended community strategies and
    measurements to prevent obesity in the United States, MMWR
    Recommendations and Reports 58 (2009): 1–26.
4. B. M. Popkin, The World Is Fat (New York: Penguin Group,
    2009).
5. L. Davies, 25 years of saving lives, Driven, Fall (2005), 8–17.
    Available at http://www.madd.org/getattachment/48e81e1b-
    df43–4f31-b9a1-d94d5b940e62/MADD-25-Years-of-Saving-
    Lives.aspx. Accessed on November 30, 2009.
6. Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health,
    Shining the spotlight on trans fats (2007),
    http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/ nutrition-
    news/transfats/.
7. Center for Science in the Public Interest, Trans fat: On the way
    out! (2009), http://www.cspinet.org/transfat/.
8. D. S. Ludwig, K. E. Peterson, and S. L. Gortmaker, Relation
    between consumption of sugar-sweetened drinks and childhood
    obesity: A prospective, observational analysis, Lancet 357
    (2001): 505–8.
9. Alliance for a Healthier Generation, Clinton Foundation, and
    American Heart Association, Alliance for a Healthier
    Generation and industry leaders set healthy school beverage
    guidelines for U.S. schools (2006),
    http://www.americanheart.org/presenter.jhtml?
    identifier=3039339.
10. M. B. Schulze et al., Sugar-sweetened beverages, weight gain,
    and incidence of type 2 diabetes in young and middle-aged
    women, JAMA 292 (2004): 927–34. T. T. Fung et al.,
    Sweetened beverage consumption and risk of coronary heart
    disease in women, Am J Clin Nutr 89 (2009): 1037–42. J. R.
    Palmer et al., Sugar-sweetened beverages and incidence of type
    2 diabetes mellitus in African American women, Archives of
    Internal Medicine 168 (2008): 1487–92. V. S. Malik, M. B.
    Schulze, and F. B. Hu, Intake of sugar-sweetened beverages and


    weight gain: A systematic review, Am J Clin Nutr 84 (2006):
    274–88. L. R. Vartanian, M. B. Schwartz, and K. D. Brownell,
    Effects of soft drink consumption on nutrition and health: A
    systematic review and meta-analysis, American Journal of
    Public Health 97 (2007): 667–75.
11.  S. L. Mercer et al., Drawing possible lessons for obesity
    prevention and control from the tobacco control experience, in
    Obesity Prevention & Public Health, ed. D. Crawford and R. W.
    Jeffery (New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2005), 231–63.
12.  FXB International, About FXB: History. Accessed on November
    29, 2009, http://www.fxb.org/AboutFXB/history.html.
13.  Department of Nutrition, Harvard School of Public Health,
    Time to focus on healthier drinks (2009),
    http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/nutritionsource/healthy-
    drinks/focus/.
14.  L. K. Khan et al., Recommended community strategies: 1–26.
15.  T. N. Hanh, Transformation at the Base (Berkeley, CA: Parallax
    Press, 2001).




INDEX
  advertising, 13, 54–55, 157, 158
  alcohol consumption, 116–18, 206, 228
  anger, 16–17, 60, 81–85, 138–39, 211–12
  anxiety, 41–42, 45–46, 77–79, 119, 193
  apple meditation, 5, 39–43, 119, 131
  beverages: alcohol consumption, 116–18, 206, 228; avoiding sugary, 22–23, 110,
    115–16, 230–31, 233, 251–52; caffeine in, 116, 206; coffee and tea, 116; Harvard
    School of Public Health guidelines for healthy, 115–16; juice, 110, 115; mindful
    drinking, 114, 118, 119, 122
  blood pressure, 107–9, 112–13, 151, 158, 169
  blood sugar, 80, 100, 109–11, 158
  body image, 164–65
  body-mind connection, 45–46, 65, 71–72
  brain functioning, 13, 45–46, 149, 151, 208
  breakfast, 129–30, 143, 144
  breathing exercises. See conscious breathing; in Breathing meditations
  Buddha/Buddhism: becoming a Buddha, 93; feelings in, 17, 77–78; Five Mindfulness
    Trainings, 209–12; Five Remembrances, 236; on habit energy, 15; Maitreya, 205;
    pretas in, 20–21; sangha in, 35, 64, 104, 205–6; Sutra on the Son’s Flesh, 49, 241–
    42. See also Four Foundations of Mindfulness; Four Noble Truths; four
    nutriments; mindfulness
  calorie-need calculators, 104
  calories, 14–15, 20, 23–25, 103, 104, 154–55
  cancer: alcohol consumption and, 116, 117; diet and, 52, 100, 101, 107–9, 114,
    127; exercise lowering risk, 149, 150; overweight and, 19


causes of weight problems: drinking sugary beverages, 22–23; environmental
  barriers, 26–27; inadequate exercise/physical activity, 23; law of thermodynamics,
  14–15, 20; mind-body disconnect, 72; mindless eating, 25–26; misc. factors, 27–
  28; not enough sleep, 24–25; overview on, 20–21, 28–29; personal
  makeup/interrelationships, 5–6, 22; social forces, 2, 12–14; suffering and
  emotions, 61–62; television watching, 23–24
change, 15–17, 32–35, 37, 221–23, 232–35
circadian rhythm, 134, 206
collective mindfulness. See mindful world
community-based organizing. See grassroots reform
community of support, 35, 64, 104, 205–6, 239–40
Community Supported Agriculture (CSA), 110, 231–32
compassion: cultivating individual/collective, 7, 62, 222–23; in Five Mindfulness
  Trainings, 209–11; and mindful eating, 48–49, 52, 118, 120, 123–24; regarding
  your body with, 30–31; transforming anger into, 83–85
conscious breathing: to facilitate mindfulness, 4, 6, 16, 70–73; with fidgeting and
  stretching, 174; in mindful drinking/eating, 122–24; transforming emotions
  through, 84, 88–89
consciousness, 46, 58–64, 80, 81, 91, 243
consumption, 5, 12–13, 53–54, 209, 212
cravings, 16, 20–21, 88, 212, 243
dairy products, 51, 101, 102, 107–8, 114, 115, 128
death visualization, 75
deep listening, 195–96, 209, 211–12
desire, 20–21, 55–58, 82, 88
diabetes: alcohol consumption and, 117; diet and, 100, 101, 103, 108–11, 115, 230;
  link to overweight, 19; physical activity and, 149, 158, 169
diet. See mindful eating; nutritional science
dieting, 14, 99, 103, 104, 129, 204


dimensions of reality, 172–73
directed-attention fatigue, 207–8
diseases/health conditions: diet and, 42, 98–100, 103, 107–9, 230; exercise and, 28,
  149, 169; link to television watching, 158; vitamin D to prevent, 112. See also
  individual diseases/conditions
dualism, 220–21
eating. See food; mindful eating; nutritional science
eating disorders, 138–40, 165
eating out, 12, 26, 133, 135–36, 158, 226
emotions: exercise and, 151, 165–66; food and, 16, 28, 138–40; four types in
  Buddhism, 77–78; greeting negative emotions meditation, 193–94; internal knots
  around, 87–92, 128; mindfulness of, 67–68, 76–80; nutriments and mental
  formations, 47, 54, 58–64, 81–82, 212; and sense impressions, 53–55; and
  television-watching habit, 24, 159; transforming your, 21, 31–32, 78–80, 83–85,
  88–89, 184; and weight struggles, 2, 16–17, 28
energy-balance equation, 14–15, 20, 23–25, 103, 154
environment. See physical environment; planetary wellness; social environment
exercise log, 164, 166
exercise/physical activity: appropriate levels of, 23, 151–52, 155–57, 178; benefits
  of, 149–51; community-based strategies for, 252–53; in the energy-balance
  equation, 23, 154; with health conditions, 28, 169; resources on, 261–63; social
  trends and, 6, 13–14; strategies to encourage, 252; strength and flexibility, 152–
  53; suggested types of, 163, 168, 174–75, 177–78, 249–50; and weight
  loss/maintenance, 14–15, 20, 151, 153–56. See also mindful moving
exercise/physical activity barriers: addressing in in Moving plan, 178–79; associated
  expenses, 166–67; being overwhelmed, 165–66; body aches and pains, 169; feeling
  embarrassed, 160, 164–65; lack of time, 161–63; neighborhood restrictions, 167–
  69, 225, 234, 252–53; overview on, 160–62; tiredness, 160, 163–64
family: genetics and weight problems, 22; inextricable link to, 75, 91; profound
  influence of, 5, 58, 87; transforming negative seeds of, 91–92; weight loss support


   from, 104, 128, 161, 200, 204–5
farming: community-supported, 110, 231–32; gratitude to farmers, 42, 97, 119–21,
   125; livestock, 50–53, 114, 127–28; sustainable agriculture resources, 263–64
fast food, 26, 133, 135–36, 158, 226
fats, 13, 98, 99, 101–6, 107, 228–30
fear, 59, 61–62, 161, 171, 173
feelings. See emotions
Five Contemplations, 124
Five Mindfulness Trainings, 209–12
Five Remembrances, 236
food: cravings, 16, 20–21, 88, 212, 243; in Eating strategy, 141–42; and emotions,
   16, 28, 138–40; highly seasoned, 12–13; labeling of, 103, 115, 128, 229–30; as
   nutriment, 47–53, 241–42; portion distortion, 25–26; promoting healthy, 251–52;
   reflection questions around, 28; resources on, 255–56, 258–59; restaurant food,
   12, 26, 133, 135–36, 158, 226; snackability, 41. See also beverages; mindful
   eating; nutritional science
“food desert,” 128, 225
food diary, 138, 139, 201
food production system, 47–53, 97–98, 213, 218–19, 258–59
four elements, 75
Four Foundations of Mindfulness, 69–92; of the body, 70–76, 84; of the feelings,
   76–80; of the mind, 80–86; objects of mind, 86–92; overview on the, 69–70; as
   transformative, 6, 92–93
Four Noble Truths, 17–35; applying the, 5, 17–18; following a mindful path to
   healthy weight (Fourth Noble Truth), 32–35; a healthy weight is possible (Third
   Noble Truth), 29–32; identifying the roots of your weight problem (Second Noble
   Truth), 20–29; overweight/obesity is suffering (First Noble Truth), 19–20
four nutriments, 46–65; Buddha’s teaching on, 46–47, 241–43; consciousness (fourth
   nutriment), 46, 58–64; daily mindful consumption of, 64–65; edible food and
   drinks (first nutriment), 47–53, 241–42; in Five Mindfulness Trainings, 209, 212;
   and the mind-body connection, 45–47; seeds and the, 62–63, 81–82, 91, 92, 183–


   84, 207; sense impressions (second nutriment), 46, 53–55, 58–59; store
   consciousness and the, 58–62, 80, 81, 91; Sutra on the Son’s Flesh, 49, 241–42;
   volition (third nutriment), 46, 55–58
friends: active social time with, 138, 147, 162, 164; healthy lunch swap, 137; and
   mindful television watching, 144–45, 159; nurturing positive mind seeds, 60;
   weight loss/maintenance support from, 104, 128, 161, 201, 204–5
gates (to our consciousness), 59
global warming, 124, 128, 179, 199, 210, 218
goal setting, 32–33, 36–37, 140–45, 178, 185
grassroots reform: examples of, 228–32; individual action toward, 232–35; No-Car
   Days, 179; to prevent/control obesity, 251–53; resources for, 259–60
grazing, 127
gyms, 153, 164–68
habit energy: distracting from mindfulness, 128, 182; environment influencing, 58,
   87; mechanism of negative, 87–88; overcoming, 15–17, 26, 185, 187; preventing
   relapses into, 208–9
happiness, 56–57, 77, 173, 207, 209, 210
healing, 17, 20, 90–91, 171–72, 209, 212
healthy eating. See mindful eating; nutritional science
Healthy Eating and Active Living Web, 225–27
healthy weight. See overcoming weight problems
heart disease: exercise lowering risk of, 149; foods/beverages increasing risk of, 101,
   103, 108, 111, 115, 127, 230; link to trans fats, 103, 229; foods/beverages
   lowering risk of, 42, 52, 100, 106, 107–9, 117; overweight/sedentary lifestyle, 19,
   158; related to mental distress, 46; sodium and, 113
high blood pressure, 107–9, 112–13, 116, 151, 169
in Breathing meditations: cooking, 198; deep-listening/loving-speech, 195–96;
   driving, 191–92; elevator, 193; flower, 196; good-night, 199, 206; greeting-our-


   negative-emotions, 193–94; hurrying, 189; Internet/e-mail, 194; jogging/brisk-
   walking, 191; key, 198; light-switch, 190; for mindful living, 187–88, 200, 202–3;
   for mindful moving, 159, 170–75, 179; multitasking, 197–98; sky, 191; smiling,
   190; standing-in-line, 197; sunrise, 188; sunset, 198–99; teeth-brushing, 189;
   traffic-jam, 192; tree meditation for stability, 196; waking-up, 188; water-faucet,
   192–93
individual change efforts. See mindful world in Eating strategy, 140–45, 184–86,
   202–3
in Moving plan, 176–79, 186, 202–3
interbeing, 52, 75, 209, 220–21
interdependence: around physical energy, 148; daily thanksgiving for, 235–36; in
   food production, 97–98, 213, 218–19; penetrating through mindfulness, 7, 92–93,
   209; plant-based diet and, 52–53; transformation and, 69, 220–25. See also
   mindful world internal knots, 87–92, 128, 175–76
journaling, 27–28, 138–41, 164, 166, 201
law of thermodynamics, 14–15
lifestyle changes. See mindful living plan
listening, deep, 195–96, 209, 211–12
love, 30, 85–87, 195–96, 206–7, 209, 211–12
lunch, 130, 137, 143
maintaining a healthy weight, 34–38, 208–9
meat, 50–52, 101, 102, 107–8, 127–28, 192, 217–18
media, 13, 53–55, 60–61, 157, 158, 264–65. See also television
meditations. See in Breathing meditations
Mediterranean-style eating plan, 103, 104, 108, 204
mental formations, 59–60, 69–70, 80–82, 86, 124, 183–84
mind, 45–46, 58–65, 71–73


mind consciousness, 53, 58–61, 81
mindful eating, 97–145; acknowledging farmers in, 42, 97, 119–21, 125; apple
  meditation, 5, 39–43, 119, 131; dinner with Chef Sati, 120–22; in Eating strategy,
  140–45, 184–86; essence of, 3, 6, 145; the Five Contemplations, 124; and the food
  supply, 47–53, 97–98, 218; mind-body connection, 45–46; vs. mindless eating, 25–
  26, 132; plant-based diet, 51–52, 107–8, 127–28, 217–18; portion size, 25–26,
  125–26, 132, 136, 141–44; practice of, 62, 118–19, 123–28; resources on, 260.
  See also food; nutritional science
mindful eating barriers, 128–40; eating at night, 134–35; eating more on weekends,
  137–38; environmental, 225–27; fast food/restaurant meals, 135–36; food and
  emotions, 138–40; lack of preparation time, 136–37; overeating large portions,
  132–33; overview on, 128–29; skipping breakfast/meals, 127, 129–30; speed
  eating, 131–32
mindful living plan, 181–213; in Breathing overview, 187–88; in Eating, 140–45,
  184–86, 202–3; essence of, 7, 34–38, 182–84, 200–201; Five Mindfulness
  Trainings, 209–12; freedom from failure, 213; log book for, 201; mission
  statement for, 36–37, 182; in Moving plan, 176–79, 186, 202–3; nature
  incorporated into, 207–8; nurturing yourself daily, 206–7; preventing relapses,
  208–9; resources for, 239–40; sample ten-week, 199–200, 202–3; sleep as essential
  to, 206; support for, 26–27, 34–35, 64, 204–6. See also in Breathing meditations
mindful moving, 147–80; beyond walking, 174–75; essence of, 3, 7, 93, 147–49,
  169–70, 179–80; meditations for, 159, 170–75, 179; mindful arm swing, 175–76;
  in Moving Plan, 176–79, 186, 202–3; stretching and fidgeting, 174; television
  watching and, 156–59; Touching the Sky and the Earth, 173. See also
  exercise/physical activity; walking
mindful world, 217–37; collective effort for, 7, 205, 222–23; daily thanksgiving,
  235–36; first steps toward a, 232–35; Five Remembrances reflection, 236–37;
  individual/collective well-being, 220–22; individual connection to, 38, 217–18,
  223–28; influence and support for, 225–27; plant-based diet for, 51–52, 107–8,
  127–28, 217–18; resources on change, 259–60; as source of nutriment, 64. See
  also grassroots reform; interdependence; planetary wellness
mindfulness: apple meditation, 5, 39–43, 119, 131; benefits of, 4, 7, 30–31, 94;
  conscious breathing to facilitate, 4, 6, 16, 70–73; essence of, 2–4, 7, 68–69, 181–
  82; Five Mindfulness Trainings, 209–12; and interrelationships, 7, 92–93; key to


  making/maintaining change, 15, 34–38, 208–9; practicing, 92–94; preventing
  relapse, 208–9; resources on, 239–40, 260–61; seeds of, 62–63, 82, 91, 92. See
  also Four Foundations of Mindfulness; mindful eating; mindful living plan;
  mindful moving; mindful world
mindless eating, 25–26, 132
mission statement, 36–37, 182
nature, 196, 207–8
neighborhood barriers to exercise, 167–69, 225, 234, 252–53
neural plasticity, 151
night eating syndrome, 130, 134–35
No-Car Days, 179
nutriments. See four nutriments
nutritional science, 98–118; alcohol consumption, 116–17; added sugar, 111; amino
  acids, 101–2; blood cholesterol, 100, 102–5, 107, 229; calcium intake, 113–15;
  calories and weight control, 14–15, 20, 23–25, 103, 104, 154–55; carbohydrates,
  98–100, 103, 109; coconut oil, 102, 105; dopamine release, 13; eggs, 101, 108;
  energy-balance equation, 14–15, 20, 23–25, 103, 154; fats, 13, 98, 99, 101–7,
  228–30; fiber, 110, 111, 129, 135; fish, 101, 102, 106, 108; focus of, 98–99;
  fruits, 42, 99–100, 107–10, 135; healthy drinks, 110, 115–16; limiting
  potatoes/refined grains/sweets, 110–11; lower-carbohydrate diet, 99, 103; low-fat
  diet, 99, 103; meat, 101, 102, 107–8, 127–28; Mediterranean diet, 108, 204; milk,
  114; multivitamin, 111–12; nuts and seeds, 101, 102, 105, 106, 115; omega-3 fats,
  106; plant-based diet, 107–8, 127–28; poultry, 101, 107, 108; processed foods, 48,
  113, 137; proteins, 98–103; resources on, 255–56; salt (sodium), 13, 48, 112–13;
  sugary drinks and weight gain, 22–23; trans fats, 102–5, 228–30; vegetables, 51–
  52, 99, 107–10, 114, 127–28, 135; vegetarianism/veganism, 101–2, 106, 111–12,
  114–15; vitamin D, 99, 107, 111–12, 115; vitamins and minerals, 42, 98–100, 107,
  109, 111–15; whole grains, 99–100, 107, 111
obesigenic environment, toxic, 12
obesity. See weight problems


obesity pandemic, 1, 12
objects of the mind, 86–92
online resources: body image/eating disorder therapy, 165; CDC recommendations,
  227; Five Mindfulness Trainings, 212; food production system, 258–59; healthy
  eating/drinking, 255–56; healthy weight, 256–58; journaling, 201; mindful eating,
  260; mindful living sanghas, 104, 206, 239–40; mindfulness, 239–40, 261;
  physical activity/exercise, 262–63; sleep, 263; social change, 235, 259–60;
  sustainable agriculture/protecting the planet, 263–64; television
  alternatives/media awareness, 264–65; vegetarianism/veganism, 266
other and self, 220–21
overcoming weight problems: believing in your success, 29–32; calories matter, 103,
  104; changing your habit energy, 15–17; community-based strategies, 251–53;
  dealing with overeating, 12–14, 25–26, 61, 126–27, 131–33, 137, 144–45;
  embracing emotions around, 67–68; examples of others, 33; failure in, 11–15,
  213; healthy-weight mission statement, 36–37, 182; overview on, 3, 35–38;
  preventing relapses, 208–9; resources, 256–58; understanding interdependence,
  69. See also exercise/physical activity; food; Four Noble Truths; four nutriments;
  mindful eating; mindful living plan; mindful moving; mindfulness; support
parents, 22, 57, 87, 91–92
physical activity. See exercise/physical activity
physical environment: as barrier to healthy lifestyle, 26–27, 34–35, 167–69; food
  deserts, 128, 225; individual actions to change, 232–35; influencing
  behaviors/habits, 87, 128; need for supportive, 64, 225–27
plan for living. See mindful living plan
planetary wellness: alcohol consumption and, 118; in Eating strategy promoting,
  184–85; in first mindfulness training, 209, 210; healthy eating and, 48–50, 121,
  124, 128, 141; impact of eating meat, 50–52, 101, 217–18; milk production and,
  114; No-Car Days, 179; resources on, 263–64. See also mindful world
plant-based diet, 51–52, 107–8, 127–28, 217–18
pleasure, 13, 20, 42, 242
portion size, 25–26, 125–26, 132, 136, 141–44


pretas (Hungry Ghosts), 20–21
reality, dimensions of, 172–73
regrets, 2, 21, 81, 91
relationships, 64, 195–96, 204, 209, 211–12
relaxation exercise, 245–47
restaurant food, 12, 26, 133, 135–36, 158, 226
sangha (Buddhist practitioner community), 35, 64, 104, 205–6, 239–40
science of nutrition. See nutritional science sedentary lifestyle, 13–14, 155–58
seeds (mind), 62–63, 81–82, 91, 92, 183–84, 207
self and other, 220–21
self-efficacy, 29–30
sense impressions, 5, 46, 53–55, 58–59, 88, 242
shamatha (stopping), 15, 16, 93–94
sleep, 24–25, 135, 199, 206, 263
smiling, 123, 190
snacking, 41, 129–30, 134–35, 138, 144–45, 158
social change. See grassroots reform; mindful world
social eating, 133, 138
social environment: contribution to weight struggles, 2, 5, 12–14, 22, 87; directed-
   attention fatigue from, 207–8; fostering mindless eating/living, 25–26, 41–42; in
   Healthy Eating and Active Living Web, 226–27; mindful moving to break from,
   148; support from your, 104, 128, 161, 164, 201, 204–5. See also television
soda (sugar-sweetened beverages), 22–23, 36–37, 115–16, 185, 230–31, 233
speech, loving, 195–96, 209, 211–12
speed eating, 131–32
stopping (shamatha), 15, 16, 93–94
store consciousness, 58–62, 80, 81, 91


stress: body’s response to, 45–46; breathing meditations to eliminate, 187, 194, 245;
   eating to cope with, 138–40; exercise to relieve, 149, 151; triggering night eating
   syndrome, 134–35; from watching television, 55
stretching exercises, 173, 174
suffering: applying mindfulness to, 34, 67–68; the First Noble Truth, 17, 19–20; in
   the Five Mindfulness Trainings, 209–12; identifying causes of, 61–62, 67–68;
   making friends with, 3; recognizing in others, 84, 85; transforming, 31–32, 34;
   untying mental knots of, 87–92
sugar: in beverages, 22–23, 110, 115–16, 230–31, 233, 252; goal to reduce, 36–37;
   potatoes/refined grains/sweets, 110–11; in restaurant/processed food, 12–13, 48
support: community-based strategies to prevent/control obesity, 251–53; from
   friends/family, 104, 128, 161, 164, 200, 201, 204–5; Healthy Eating and Active
   Living Web, 225–27; sanghas for, 35, 64, 104, 205–6; to supplement self-motivated
   change, 34–35; to transform deep suffering, 89–90; for weight loss/maintenance,
   26–27, 104, 200–201, 204–6
sustainable agriculture, 263–64
Sutra on the Son’s Flesh, 49, 241–42
television: advertising and consumption, 54–55; alternatives to, 249–50, 264–65; as
   barrier to exercise, 164; emotions and watching habit, 16, 24, 159; friends
   bringing mindfulness to, 144–45, 159; reflection questions around, 28; relation to
   weight and health, 23–24, 156–59; television-viewing meditation, 159; turning off
   the “eat-and-watch” habit, 134, 144–45
thanksgiving, 235–36
Touching the Sky and the Earth, 173
trans fats, 102–5, 228–30
transformation: of emotions, 31–32, 83–85; individual compassion for, 222–223;
   interrelationships and, 223–25; mindfulness facilitating, 89–90, 93, 183–84; of
   negative seeds, 91–92; of suffering, 31–32, 34; through Four Foundations of
   Mindfulness, 6, 92–93
vegetables, 51–52, 99, 107–10, 114, 127–28, 135


vegetarianism/veganism: and compassion for animals, 52, 114; environmental
   benefits of, 51–52, 128; health benefits of, 52, 107–8; nutritional science and,
   101–2, 106, 111–12, 114–15; resources on, 265–66
vitamin D, 99, 107, 111–12, 115
vitamins and minerals, 42, 98–100, 107, 109, 111–15
volition, 46, 55–58, 242–43
walking: amount needed, 152, 154, 155; benefits of, 149, 151; and habit energy, 26;
   meditations for, 170–73, 191; mindful, 34, 40, 73, 93, 186; in weight/well-being
   goals, 36
wave metaphor, 172–73
Web sites. See online resources weight-loss industry, 14, 99
weight problems, 2, 11–12, 16–17, 19–20, 28, 32–33. See also causes of weight
   problems; Four Noble Truths; overcoming weight problems
will, 46, 55–58, 242–43
work colleagues, 137, 167, 195–96, 205, 225
workplace, 26–27, 34–35, 127, 128, 139, 245




ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Savor: Mindful Eating, Mindful Life has come to be because the
conditions are right. This book would not be possible without the
hard work of scientists, humanitarians, health experts, policy
makers, spiritual teachers, and practitioners across many
generations, and all others known and unknown who have
dedicated their lives to making our world a healthier and more
compassionate place. Our deepest gratitude to them all.
   We wish to thank Dr. Harvey V. Fineberg for writing the
foreword and Dr. Walter Willett for reviewing our book. We would
like to express our special appreciation to Sari Kalin, Hank Dart,
and Joanne Levy for assisting in the research and the preparation of
the manuscript, and our sincere thanks to our loving sanghas,
friends, and families for their kind support throughout this journey.
Finally, we wish to thank our editor at HarperOne, Gideon Weil,
and his associates, for all their help in making this book a reality.
                                     Thich Nhat Hanh & Lilian Cheung
                                                       December 2009




LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure 3.1 Seeds of Mindfulness
Figure 5.1 How Sweet Is It?
Figure 7.1 The Five Mindfulness Trainings
Figure 8.1 The Healthy Eating and Active Living Web
Table 5.1 Good Fats, Bad Fats, and Very Bad Fats
Table 6.1 Health Benefits Associated with Regular Physical Activity
Table 6.2 Examples of Di erent Aerobic Physical Activities and
Intensities
Table 6.3 How Active Should I Be?
Table 7.1 Ten-Week Sample Mindful Living Plan


APPENDIX A
Integrating Mindfulness into Your Daily Life
Mindfulness Practice Centers in the Tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh
          Blue Cliff Monastery, 3 Mindfulness Rd., Pine Bush, NY 12566
          Phone:(845)733-4959
          E-mail: office@bluecliffmonastery.org
          Web site: www.bluecliffmonastery.org
          Deer Park Monastery, 2499 Melru Lane, Escondido, CA 92026
          Phone: (760) 291-1003
          E-mail: deerpark@dpmail.net
          Web site: www.deerparkmonastery.org
          European Institute of Applied Buddhism, Schaumburgweg 3, D-
          51545 Waldbröl, Germany
          Phone: +49 (0)2291 907 1373
          E-mail: info@eiab.eu
          Web site: www.eiab.eu
          Maison de L’Inspir (House of Breathing, near Paris), 7 Allée des
          Belles Vues, 93160 Noisy-le-Grand, France
          Phone: +33 (0)9 51 35 46 34
          E-mail: maisondelinspir@yahoo.fr
          Web site: www.maisondelinspir.over-blog.com
          Plum Village, 13 Martineau, 33580 Dieulivol, France
          E-mail: lh-o ce@plumvillage.org; uh-o ce@plumvillage.org; nh-
          office@plumvillage.org
          Web site: www.plumvillage.org


Sangha Directories
Community of Mindful Living. USA Sangha Directory.
http://www.iamhome.org/usa_sangha.htm
  Community of Mindful Living. International Sangha Directory.
http://www.iamhome.org/international.htm
Mindfulness Clock
Download to your Windows computer the sound of a mindfulness
bell that you can program to ring at di erent intervals, courtesy of
the          Washington          Mindfulness           Community:
http://www.mindfulnessdc.org/ mindfulclock.html.
  For Mac computer users, the free downloadable widget ProdMe
1.1 (copyright Jim Carlson), available on the Apple Web site, can
be programmed for a “clock chimes” sound and used as a
mindfulness                                                     bell:
http://www.apple.com/downloads/dashboard/status/prodme.html.
The Now Watch
Remind yourself to stay in the here and now with this watch, in
Thich Nhat Hanh’s own calligraphy, which can be purchased from
the bookshop at Blue Cli Monastery. For more information, e-mail
the bookshop at bookshop@blue cli monastery.org, or in Europe,
e-mail itsnow@plumvillage.org.




APPENDIX B
Discourse on the Four Kinds of Nutriments
Samyukta Agama, sutra 373
This is what I heard one time when the Buddha was in the
Anathapindika Monastery in the Jeta Grove near to the town of
Shravasti. That day the Buddha told the monks: “There are four
kinds of nutriments which enable living beings to grow and
maintain life. What are these four nutriments? The rst is edible
food, the second is the food of sense impressions, the third is the
food of volition, and the fourth is the food of consciousness.”
  “Bhikkhus, how should a practitioner regard edible food?
Imagine a young couple with a baby boy whom they look after and
raise with all their love. One day they decide to bring their son to
another country to make their living. They have to go through the
di culties and dangers of a desert. During the journey, they run out
of provisions and fall extremely hungry. There is no way out for
them and they discuss the following plan: ‘We only have one son
whom we love with all our heart. If we eat his esh we shall
survive and manage to overcome this dangerous situation. If we do
not eat his esh all three of us will die.’ After this discussion, they
killed their son, with tears of pain and gritting their teeth they ate
the esh of their son, just so as to be able to live and come out of
the desert.”
  The Buddha asked: “Do you think that couple ate their son’s esh
because they wanted to enjoy its taste and because they wanted
their bodies to have the nutriment that would make them more
beautiful?”
  The monks replied: “No, Venerable Lord.” The Buddha asked:
“Were the couple forced to eat their son’s esh in order to survive
and escape from the dangers of the desert?” The monks replied:


“Yes, Venerable Lord.”
  The Buddha taught: “Monks, every time we ingest edible food,
we should train ourselves to look at it as our son’s esh. If we
meditate on it in this way we shall have clear insight and
understanding which puts an end to misperceptions about edible
food and our attachment to sensual pleasures will dissolve. Once
the attachment to sensual pleasures is transformed there are no
longer any internal formations concerning the five objects of sensual
pleasure in the noble disciple who applies himself to the training
and the practice. When the internal formations still bind us we have
to keep returning to this world.
  “How should the practitioner meditate on the food of sense
impressions? Imagine a cow which has lost its skin. Wherever it
goes the insects and maggots which live in the earth, in the dust and
on the vegetation attach themselves to the cow and suck its blood. If
the cow lies on the earth, the maggots in the earth will attach
themselves to it and feed o of it. Whether lying down or standing
up, the cow will be irritated and su er pain. When you ingest the
food of sense impressions, you should practice to see it in this light.
You will have insight and understanding which puts an end to
misperceptions concerning the food of sense impressions. When you
have this insight you will no longer be attached to the three kinds
of feeling. When no longer attached to the three kinds of feeling the
noble disciple does not need to strive anymore because whatever
needs to be done has already been done.
  “How should the practitioner meditate on the food of volition?
Imagine there is a village or a large town near to a pit of burning
charcoal. There are only the smokeless, glowing embers left. Now
there is an intelligent man with enough wisdom who does not want
to su er and only wants happiness and peace. He does not want to
die and he only wants to live. He thinks: ‘Over there the heat is very
great, although there is no smoke and there are no ames. Still, if I
have to go into that pit there is no doubt that I shall die.’ Knowing
this he is determined to leave that large town or that village and go
somewhere else. The practitioner should meditate like this on the


food of volition. Meditating like this he will have insight and
understanding which puts an end to misperceptions about the food
of volition. When he arrives at that understanding the three kinds of
craving will be ended. When these three cravings are ended, the
noble disciple who trains and practices will have no more work to
do, because whatever needs to be done has already been done.
   “How should the practitioner meditate on the food of
consciousness? Imagine that the soldiers of the king have arrested a
criminal. They bind him and bring him to the king. Because he has
committed theft he is punished by people piercing his body with
three hundred knives. He is assailed by fear and pain all day and all
night. The practitioner should regard the food of consciousness in
this light. If he does he will have insight and understanding which
puts an end to misperceptions concerning the food of consciousness.
When he has this understanding regarding the food of consciousness
the noble disciple who trains and practices will not need to strive
anymore because whatever needs to be done has been done.”
   When the Buddha had spoken, the monks were very happy to
put the teachings into practice.


APPENDIX C
Total Relaxation
(from The Art of Power, by Thich Nhat Hanh)
People in any profession can pro t from doing total relaxation
every day or every week. Maybe there’s a place in the o ce where
you can practice total relaxation for fteen minutes. You can do it
at home also. Once you have bene ted from practicing on your
own to renew yourself, you can o er a session of total relaxation to
your whole family, and to your colleagues at work. You could have
a session of total relaxation at your job every day. When coworkers
and employees become overwhelmed by stress, they are much less
e ective in their work and often miss work because of sickness.
This is very costly to the organization. So fteen minutes of total
relaxation after three or four hours of work is very practical. You
may like to lead the total relaxation yourself. You will experience a
lot of joy doing this. When you’re able to make people happy and
relaxed, your own happiness increases at the same time.
   When we do deep relaxation in a group, one person can guide
the exercise using the following instructions, or some variation of
them. You may want to invite a bell at the beginning and end of the
exercise to help people more easily enter a relaxed state of mind.
When you do deep relaxation on your own, you can make a
recording that you can play to guide you.
           Lie down on your back with your arms at your sides. Make yourself
           comfortable. Allow your body to relax. Be aware of the oor
           underneath you … and of the contact of your body with the oor.
           Allow your body to sink into the floor.
              Become aware of your breathing, in and out. Be aware of your
           abdomen rising and falling as you breathe in and out… rising…
           falling… rising … falling.


   Breathing in, breathing out … your whole body feels light … like
a water lily oating on the water… You have nowhere to go…
nothing to do … You are free as the cloud floating in the sky.
   Breathing in, bring your awareness to your eyes. Breathing out,
allow your eyes to relax. Allow your eyes to sink back into your
head … let go of the tension in all the tiny muscles around your
eyes … our eyes allow us to see a paradise of forms and colors …
allow your eyes to rest… send love and gratitude to your eyes.
   Breathing in, bring your awareness to your mouth. Breathing out,
allow your mouth to relax. Release the tension around your mouth
… your lips are the petals of a ower… let a gentle smile bloom on
your lips… smiling releases the tension in the hundreds of muscles
in your face … feel the tension release in your cheeks … your jaw
… your throat.
   Breathing in, bring your awareness to your shoulders. Breathing
out, allow your shoulders to relax. Let them sink into the oor… let
all the accumulated tension ow into the oor … we carry so much
with our shoulders … now let them relax as we care for our
shoulders.
   Breathing in, become aware of your arms. Breathing out, relax
your arms. Let your arms sink into the oor… your upper arms…
your elbows … your lower arms … your wrists … hands … ngers
… all the tiny muscles … move your ngers a little if you need to,
to help the muscles relax.
   Breathing in, bring your awareness to your heart. Breathing out,
allow your heart to relax. We have neglected our heart for a long
time by the way we work, eat, and deal with anxiety and stress. Our
heart beats for us night and day. Embrace your heart with
mindfulness and tenderness, reconciling with and taking care of
your heart.
   Breathing in, bring your awareness to your legs. Breathing out,
allow your legs to relax. Release all the tension in your legs … your
thighs … your knees … your calves … your ankles … your feet…
your toes … all the tiny muscles in your toes … you may want to
move your toes a little to help them relax… send your love and care


           to your toes.
              Bring your awareness back to your breathing… to your abdomen
           rising and falling.
              Following your breathing, become aware of your arms and legs …
           you may want to move them a little and stretch.
              When you feel ready, slowly sit up. When you are ready, slowly
           stand up.
The above exercises can guide awareness to any part of the body:
the hair, brain, ears, neck, lungs, each of the internal organs, the
digestive system, or to any part of the body that needs healing and
attention. You embrace each part and send it your love, gratitude,
and care as you hold it in your awareness and breathe in and out.


APPENDIX D
Screen-Time Alternatives
           Acting
           Bike riding
           Bowling
           Camping
           Caring for your pet
           Cleaning the house
           Cooking
           Crafting
           Dancing
           Doing laundry
           Doing push-ups
           Doing sit-ups
           Doing yoga
           Drawing
           Fishing
           Gardening
           Going to a house of worship
           Going to a spiritual center
           Going to the gym
           Golfing
           Grocery shopping
           Hiking
           In-line skating
           Inviting friends over
           Journaling


Jogging
Jumping rope
Knitting or crocheting
Learning a language
Listening to music
Meditating
Mindful walking
Mowing the lawn
Organizing
Painting
Planting flowers
Playing an instrument
Playing board games
Playing Dance, Dance Revolution
Playing Frisbee
Playing tag
Playing team sports
Playing tennis
Playing with a hacky sack
Playing with children
Reading
Relaxing
Scrapbooking
Singing
Sleeping
Solving number puzzles
Spending time with family
Storytelling
Stretching


           Swimming
           Taking photographs
           Talking on the phone with friends
           Tutoring
           Visiting a museum
           Volunteering
           Walking
           Woodworking
           Writing poetry
Adapted from Lilian W. Y. Cheung, Hank Dart, Sari Kalin, and
Steven L. Gortmaker, Eat Well & Keep Moving, 2nd ed.
(Champaign, IL: Human Kinetics), p. 387.


APPENDIX E
Community-Based Strategies to Prevent and Control Obesity
Strategies to Promote the Availability of Affordable Healthy Food
and Beverages
   1. Communities should increase the availability of healthier
      food and beverage choices in public service venues.
   2. Communities should improve the availability of a ordable,
      healthier food and beverage choices in public service venues.
   3. Communities should improve the geographic availability of
      supermarkets in underserved areas.
   4. Communities should provide incentives to food retailers to
      locate in underserved areas and/or to o er healthier food and
      beverage choices in those areas.
   5. Communities should improve the availability of
      mechanisms for purchasing foods from farms.
   6. Communities should provide incentives for the production,
      distribution, and procurement of foods from local farms.
   7. Communities should restrict the availability of less-healthy
      foods and beverages in public service venues.
      Source: L. K. Khan et al., Recommended community strategies
      and measurements to prevent obesity in the United States,
      MMWR Recommendations and Reports 58 (2009): 1–26. For
      more information on all of these strategies, see the full article
      on            the          journal’s         Web            site:
      http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5807a1.htm.


   8.    Communities should institute smaller portion size options
      in public service venues.
   9. Communities should limit advertisements of less-healthy
      foods and beverages.
 10. Communities should discourage the consumption of sugar-
      sweetened beverages.
Strategy to Encourage Breast-Feeding
Communities should increase support for breast-feeding.
Strategies to Encourage Physical Activity or Limit Sedentary Activity
Among Children and Youth
   1. Communities should require physical education in schools.
   2. Communities should increase the amount of physical
      activity in physical education programs in schools.
   3. Communities should increase the opportunities for
      extracurricular physical activity.
   4. Communities should reduce computer-screen time in public
      service venues, such as schools, day care centers, and after-
      school programs.
Strategies to Create Safe Communities That Support Physical
Activity
   1. Communities should improve access to outdoor recreational
      facilities.
   2. Communities should enhance infrastructure that supports
      bicycling.
   3. Communities should enhance infrastructure that supports
      walking.
   4. Communities should support locating schools within easy


      walking distance of residential areas.
   5.    Communities should improve access to public
      transportation.
   6.    Communities should zone for mixed-use development.
   7.    Communities should enhance personal safety in areas where
      people are or could be physically active.
   8.    Communities should enhance tra c safety in areas where
      people are or could be physically active.
Strategy to Encourage Communities to Organize for Change
Communities should participate in community coalitions or
partnerships to address obesity.




APPENDIX F
Resources
Healthy Eating and Drinking
Books
   Nestle, M. What to Eat. New York: North Point Press, 2006.
   Willett, W. C., and P. J. Skerrett. Eat, Drink, and Be Healthy: The Harvard Medical
     School Guide to Healthy Eating. New York: Free Press, 2005.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   American Institute for Cancer Research. American Institute for Cancer Research
     Home Page. http://www.aicr.org.
   American Institute for Cancer Research, World Cancer Research Foundation. Food,
     Nutrition, Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective—
     Online. August 19, 2009; http://www.dietandcancerreport.org/.
   Center for Science in the Public Interest. Nutrition Action Health Letter.
     http://www.cspinet.org/nah/index.htm.
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Healthy Eating for a Healthy Weight.
     http://www.cdc.gov/healthyweight/healthy_eating/.
   Cooper Institute. Stand Up (More) and Eat (Better). http://www.standupandeat. org/.
   Harvard School of Public Health. The Nutrition Source: Knowledge for Healthy
     Eating. http://www.thenutritionsource.org.
   National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism. College Drinking— Changing
     the Culture. http://www.collegedrinkingprevention.gov/.
   U.S. Department of Agriculture. My Pyramid Tracker.
     http://www.mypyramidtracker.gov/.
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health


     Services Administration. Alcohol & Drug Information. http://ncadi.samhsa.gov/.
   U.S. Food and Drug Administration. Food Labeling and Nutrition Education Tools.
     http://www.fda.gov/Food/LabelingNutrition/ConsumerInformation/ucm121642.htm.
Healthy Weight
Books
   Critser, G. Fat Land. New York: Penguin Books, 2004.
   Hu, F. B. Obesity Epidemiology. New York: Oxford Univ. Press, 2008.
   Institute of Medicine. Progress in Preventing Childhood Obesity: How Do We
     Measure Up? Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
   Katzen, M., and W. C. Willett. Eat, Drink, & Weigh Less: A Flexible and Delicious
     Way to Shrink Your Waist Without Going Hungry. New York: Hyperion, 2006.
   Kumanyika, S. Handbook of Obesity Prevention: A Resource for Health Professionals.
     New York: Springer, 2007.
   Kushner, R. F. Dr. Kushner’s Personality Type Diet. New York: St. Martin’s Griffin
     Press, 2004.
   Ludwig, D. S., with S. Rostler. Ending the Food Fight: Guide Your Child to a Healthy
     Weight in a Fast Food/Fake Food World. New York: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt,
     2007.
   Neumark-Sztainer, D. I’m Like So Fat. New York: Guilford Publications, 2005.
   Popkin, B. M. The World Is Fat. New York: Penguin Group, 2009.
   Satter, E. How to Get Your Kid to Eat… but Not Too Much. Boulder: Bull Publishing
     Company, 1987.
Web Sites and Online Publications
Action for Healthy Kids. Action for Healthy Kids Home Page.
http://www.actionforhealthykids.org/.
   Brown Medical School. The National Weight Control Registry. http://www.nwcr.ws/.
   California Project LEAN. California Project LEAN: Leaders Encourage Activityand


   Nutrition. http://www.californiaprojectlean.org/.
Canadian Obesity Network. Canadian Obesity Network Home Page.
   http://www.obesitynetwork.ca/.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. The Guide to Community Preventive
   Services—Obesity Prevention.
   http://www.thecommunityguide.org/obesity/index.html.
______. Overweight and Obesity. http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/.
______. Overweight and Obesity: State Stories.
http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/stateprograms/statestories.html. Centers for Science in
   the Public Interest. Nutrition Policy.
http://www.cspinet.org/nutritionpolicy/index.html. Harvard School of Public
   Health. Harvard Prevention Research Center on
Nutrition and Physical Activity. http://www.hsph.harvard.edu/prc/.
International Obesity Task Force. International Obesity Task Force Home Page.
   http://www.iotf.org.
Louisiana State University. Pennington Biomedical Research Center.
   http://www.pbrc.edu/.
Mayo Clinic. MayoClinic.com—Healthy Lifestyle.
   http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/HealthyLivingIndex/HealthyLivingIndex.
Mayo Clinic Staff. Calorie Calculator. http://www.mayoclinic.com/health/calorie-
   calculator/NU00598.
National Eating Disorders Association. National Eating Disorders Association.
   http://www.nationaleatingdisorders.org/.
National Heart Lung and Blood Institute. Calculate Your Body Mass Index.
   http://www.nhlbisupport.com/bmi/.
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases. Weight-control
   Information Network (WIN). http://win.niddk.nih.gov/.
National Institutes of Health. We Can! (Ways to Enhance Children’s Activity &
   Nutrition). http://www.nhlbi.nih.gov/health/public/heart/obesity/wecan/.
New England Coalition for Health Promotion and Disease Prevention. Strategic Plan
   for Prevention and Control of Overweight and Obesity in New England.


      http://www.neconinfo.org/02–11–2003_Strategic_Plan.pdf.
   Robert Wood Johnson Foundation. Active Living Research.
      http://www.activelivingresearch.org/.
   _______. Healthy Eating Research. http://www.healthyeatingresearch.org/.
   Shape Up America! Shape Up America! Healthy Weight for Life.
      http://www.shapeup.org/.
   Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine. Your Disease
      Risk: The Source on Prevention. http://www.yourdiseaserisk.org/.
   Trust for America’s Health. F as in Fat 2009: How Obesity Policies Are Failing in
      America. http://healthyamericans.org/reports/obesity2009/.
   Tufts University. Children in Balance. http://www.childreninbalance.org/.
   University of California at Berkeley. Dr. Robert C. and Veronica Atkins Center for
      Weight & Health. http://cwh.berkeley.edu/.
   Yale University. Rudd Center for Food Policy and Obesity.
      http://www.yaleruddcenter.org/.
How Food Reaches Our Table
Books
   Brownell, K. D., and K. B. Horgen. Food Fight: The Inside Story of the Food Industry,
      America’s Obesity Crisis, and What We Can Do About It. New York: McGraw-Hill,
      2003.
   Kingsolver, B. Animal, Vegetable, Miracle. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.
   Nestle, M. Food Politics: How the Food Industry Influences Nutrition and Health.
      2nd ed. California Studies in Food and Culture 3. Berkeley: Univ. of California
      Press, 2007.
   Pollan, M. In Defense of Food: An Eater’s Manifesto. New York: Penguin, 2008.
   _______. The Omnivore’s Dilemma: A Natural History of Four Meals. New York:
      Penguin, 2006.
   Schlosser, E. Fast Food Nation: The Dark Side of the All-American Meal. New York:
      Houghton Mifflin, 2001.


Web Sites and Online Publications
  Edible Schoolyard. The Edible Schoolyard Home Page.
    http://www.edibleschoolyard.org/.
  FoodRoutes Network. FoodRoutes.org Home Page. http://www.foodroutes.org.
  Kitchen Gardeners International. Kitchen Gardeners International Home Page.
    http://www.kitchengardeners.org/.
  Slow Food. Slow Food International—Good, Clean, and Fair Food.
    http://www.slowfood.com/.
  Small Planet Institute. Small Planet Institute Home Page.
    http://smallplanetinstitute.org/.
  Sustainable Table. Sustainable Table: Serving Up Healthy Food Choices.
    http://www.sustainabletable.org/home.php.
Movies
  Kenner, R. and E. Schlosser. Food Inc. 2008. More information available at
    http://www.foodincmovie.com/.
  Spurlock, M. Super Size Me. 2004.
  Stein, J., Peaceable Kingdom. 2004. More information available at
    http://www.peaceablekingdomfilm.org/.
  Woolf, A., King Corn. 2007. More information available at
    http://www.kingcorn.net/.
Making Change in Your Community and in the World
Web Sites and Online Publications
  Active Living by Design. Active Living by Design Home Page.
    http://www.activelivingbydesign.org/.
  Active Living Resource Center. Active Living Resource Center Home Page.
    http://www.activelivingresources.org/index.php.


   Center for Science in the Public Interest. Center for Science in the Public Interest
     Home Page. http://www.cspinet.org/.
   Change.org. Change.org Home Page. http://www.change.org/.
   Fight the Obesity Epidemic. Fight the Obesity Epidemic: Stop Our
     ChildrenDeveloping Type 2 Diabetes. http://www.FOE.org.NZ.
   Free the Children. Free the Children Home Page. http://freethechildren.com/.
     Harvard School of Public Health. The Francois-Xavier Bagnoud Center for Health
     and Human Rights. http://www.harvardfxbcenter.org/.
   National Center for Biking and Walking. BikeWalk.org. http://www.bikewalk.
     org/index.php.
   Parents Jury. The Parents Jury: Your Voice on Food and Activity.
     http://www.parentsjury.org.au.
   Sustain: The Alliance for Better Food and Farming. Sustainweb.org.
     http://www.sustainweb. org/.
   USA.gov. Contact Elected Officials. http://www.usa.gov/Contact/Elected.shtml.
Mindful Eating
Books
   Albers, S. Eating Mindfully: How to End Mindless Eating and Enjoy a Balanced
     Relationship with Food. Oakland, CA: New Harbinger Publications, 2003.
   Bays, J. Mindful Eating. Boston: Shambhala, 2009.
   Goodall, J. Harvest for Hope: A Guide to Mindful Eating. New York: Time Warner
     Book Group, 2005.
   Kessler, D. A. The End of Overeating: Taking Control of the Insatiable American
     Appetite. New York: Rodale Press, 2009.
   Yuen, C. The Cosmos in a Carrot: A Zen Guide to Eating Well. Berkeley: Parallax
     Press, 2006.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   Center for Mindful Eating. The Center for Mindful Eating Home Page.


      http://www.tcme.org/library.htm.
   Wansink, B. MindlessEating.org. http://www.mindlesseating.org/.
Mindfulness
Books
   Badiner, A. H., ed. Mindfulness in the Marketplace: Compassionate Responses to
      Consumerism. Berkeley: Parallax Press, 2002.
   Hanh, T. N. Anger: Wisdom for Cooling the Flames. New York: Riverhead Books,
      2001.
   _______. The Art of Power. New York: HarperCollins, 2007.
   _______. Creating True Peace. New York: Simon and Schuster, 2003.
   _______. The Heart of the Buddha’s Teachings. Berkeley: Parallax Press, 1998.
   _______. Peace Is Every Step: The Path of Mindfulness in Everyday Life. New York:
   Bantam Books, 1991. Langer, E. J. Mindfulness. Cambridge, MA: Perseus, 1989.
   Siegel, D. The Mindful Brain. New York: Norton, 2007.
Newsletters and Magazines
   Community of Interbeing UK. Here and Now Newsletter.
      http://www.interbeing.org.uk/here &now/.
   Mindfulness Bell: A Journal of the Art of Mindful Living. You can subscribe to and
      learn more about the Mindfulness Bell at www.iamhome.org.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   Community of Interbeing UK. The Community of Interbeing Manual of Practice.
      http://www.interbeing.org.uk/manual/.
   Community of Mindful Living. International Sangha Directory.
      http://www.iamhome.org/international.htm.
   _______. USA Sangha Directory. http://www.iamhome.org/usa_sangha.htm.
   Mindful Kids. Mindful Kids Blog: Sharing Mindfulness with Children.


     http://mindfulkids.wordpress.com/.
   Plum Village. Practice: Art of Mindful Living. http://plumvillage.org/practice.html.
     The site includes a helpful list of all the mindfulness practices in the Thich Nhat
     Hanh tradition. UCLA Semel Institute.
   UCLA Mindful Awareness Research Center. http://marc.ucla.edu/.
   University of Massachusetts Medical School. Center for Mindfulness in Medicine,
     Health Care, and Society. http://www.umassmed.edu/content.aspx?id=41252.
   University of Pennsylvania. Authentic Happiness Home Page.
     http://www.authentichappiness.sas.upenn.edu/Default.aspx.
   Wake Up. Wake Up: Young Buddhists and Non-Buddhists for a Healthy and
     Compassionate Society. http://wkup.org/.
Physical Activity and Exercise
Books
   Anderson, B. Stretching. Illustrated by J. Anderson. Bolinas, CA: Shelter Publications,
     2000.
   Boccio, F. J., and G. Feuerstein. Mindfulness Yoga: The Awakened Union of Breath,
     Body and Mind. Somerville, MA: Wisdom Publications, 2004.
   Chryssicas, M. K. Breathe: Yoga for Teens. New York: DK Publishing, 2007.
   Cooper, K. H., and T. C. Cooper. Start Strong, Finish Strong: Prescriptions for a
     Lifetimes of Great Health. New York: Penguin Group, 2007.
   Hanh, T., and W. Vriezen. Mindful Movements. Berkeley: Parallax Press, 2008.
   Komitor, J. B. The Complete Idiot’s Guide to Yoga with Kids. Indianapolis, IN:
     Prentice Hall, 2000.
   Manson, J., and P. Amend. The 30-Minute Fitness Solution: A Four-Step Plan for
     Women of All Ages. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Univ. Press, 2001.
   Nelson, M. A., Strong Women, Strong Bones. New York: C.P. Putnam & Sons, 2000.
   Ratey, J. J. Spark: The Revolutionary New Science of Exercise and the Brain. Boston:
     Little, Brown & Company, 2008.


Special Reports
   Harvard Health Publishing. Exercise: A Program You Can Live With. Boston, 2007.
   _______. Strength and Power Training: A Guide for Adults of All Ages. Boston, 2007.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   Attack Point. Attack Point Home Page. http://attackpoint.org/.
   Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Physical Activity Plan.
      http://www.physicalactivityplan.org/.
   _______. Physical Activity. http://www.cdc.gov/physicalactivity/.
   Gmaps Pedometer. Gmaps Pedometer Home Page. http://www.gm ap-
      pedometer.com/.
   Mayo Clinic Staff. Weight Training Exercises for Major Muscle Groups.
      http://www.mayo clinic. com/health/weight-training/SM00041.
   National Institute on Aging. Exercise and Physical Activity: Your Everyday Guide
      from the National Institute of Aging.
      http://www.nia.nih.gov/healthinformation/publications/exerciseguide.
   President’s Council on Physical Fitness and Sports. Fitness.gov.
      http://www.fitness.gov/.
   USA Track and Field. America’s Running Routes. http://www.usatf.org/routes/.
   U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2008 Physical Activity Guidelines
      for Americans: Be Active, Healthy, and Happy!
      http://www.health.gov/paguidelines/guidelines/default.aspx.
Sleep
Books
   Epstein, L. The Harvard Medical School Guide to a Good Night’s Sleep. New York:
      McGraw-Hill, 2007.
Web Sites and Online Publications


   Harvard Medical School. Healthy Sleep. http://healthysleep.med.harvard.edu/.
   National Sleep Foundation. SleepFoundation.org. http://www.sleepfoundation.org/.
Sustainable Agriculture and Protecting the Planet
Books
   Brown, L. R. Plan B 3.0: Mobilizing to Save Civilization. New York: W. W. Norton &
      Company, 2008. Also available for free download at
      http://www.earthpolicy.org/images/uploads/book_files/pb3book.pdf.
   Fukuoka, M. The One-Straw Revolution: An Introduction to Natural Farming. New
      York: The New York Review of Books, 2009.
   Hanh, T. N. The World We Have. Berkeley: Parallax Press, 2008.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   The Climate Project. TheClimateProject.Org. http://www.theclimateproject.org.
   Deer Park Monastery. Earth Peace Treaty. http://www.earthpeacetreaty.org/.
   Gore, A. ClimateCrisis.Net. http://www.climatecrisis.net/.
   Harvard Medical School. Center for Health and the Global Environment.
      http://chge.med.harvard.edu/index.html.
   Harvard University. Harvard University Center for the Environment.
      http://environment.harvard.edu/.
   _______. Sustainability at Harvard. http://www.greencampus.harvard.edu/. Johns
      Hopkins University. Center for a Livable Future. http://www.jhsph. edu/clf/.
   Local Harvest. Local Harvest Home Page. http://www.localharvest.org/.
   Sustainable Agriculture Research and Education. Sustainable Agriculture and
      Research Education Home Page. http://sare.org/.
   United Nations Environment Programme and the World Meteorological
      Organization. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC).
      http://www.ipcc.ch/.
   USDA National Agricultural Library. Community Supported Agriculture. September


      28, 2009; http://nal.usda.gov/afsic/pubs/csa/csa.shtml.
   _______. Sustainable Agriculture: Information Access Tools. October 14, 2009;
      http://nal.usda.gov/afsic/pubs/agnic/susag.shtml.
   W. K. Kellogg Foundation. Overview: Food & Fitness.
      http://www.wkkf.org/default.aspx?tabid=75&CID=383&NID=61&LanguageID=0.
   World Carfree Network. World Carfree Day. http://www.worldcarfree.net/wcrd/.
TV Alternatives and Media Awareness
Books
   Bennett, S., and R. Bennett. 365 TV-Free Activities You Can Do with Your Child: Plus
      50 All-New Bonus Activities. Avon, MA: Adams Media Corporation, 2002.
   Institute of Medicine. Food Marketing to Children and Youth: Threat or
      Opportunity. Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2006.
   Linn, S. Consuming Kids: The Hostile Takeover of Childhood. New York: New Press,
      2004.
Web Sites and Online Publications
   Campaign for a Commercial-Free Childhood. Campaign for a Commercial-Free
      Childhood Home Page. http://www.commercialexploitation.org/.
   Center for Media Literacy. Center for Media Literacy Home Page.
      http://www.medialit.org/.
   Center for Screen Time Awareness. ScreenTime.org.
      http://www.screentime.org/index.php?option=com_frontpage&Itemid=1.
   Kaiser Family Foundation. Study of Media and Health.
      http://www.kff.org/entmedia/index.cfm.
   Media Awareness Network. Dealing with Marketing: What Parents Can Do.
      http://www.media-awareness.ca/english/parents/marketing/dealing_
      marketing.cfm.


Vegetarianism and Veganism
Books
   Bittman, M. Food Matters: A Guide to Conscious Eating. New York: Simon and
      Schuster, 2008.
   _______. How to Cook Everything Vegetarian. Hoboken, NJ: Wiley Publishing Inc.,
      2007.
   Brown, E. E. The Complete Tassajara Cookbook: Recipes, Techniques, and
      Reflections from the Famed Zen Kitchen. Boston: Shambhala, 2009.
   Davis B., and V. Melina. Becoming Vegan: The Complete Guide to Adopting a
      Healthy Plant-Based Diet. Summertown, TN: Book Publishing Company, 2000.
   Foer, J. S. Eating Animals. New York: Little, Brown and Company, 2009.
   Hutchins, I., and D. M. Daniels. The Vegetarian Soul Food Cookbook. New York:
      Epiphany Books, 2001.
   Jacobson, M. Six Arguments for a Greener Diet: How a More Plant-Based Diet Could
      Save Your Health and the Environment. Washington, DC: Center for Science in the
      Public Interest, 2006.
   Katzen, M. The New Moosewood Cookbook. Berkeley: Ten Speed Press, 2000.
   _______. The Vegetable Dishes I Can’t Live Without. New York: Hyperion, 2007.
   Laland, S. Peaceful Kingdom: Random Acts of Kindness by Animals. Berkeley: Conari
      Press, 1997.
   Lappe, A., and B. Terry. Grub: Ideas for an Urban Organic Kitchen. New York:
      Penguin Books, 2006,
   Ly, Thi Phung, A. McIvor, J. Magezis, and the Cambridge Sangha. Vegetarian
      Vietnamese Cookery. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge Sangha. Available from the
      Community of Interbeing Bookshop, tel: 0870 850 2615, e-mail: book
      shop@interbeing.org.uk, www.interbeing.org.uk/bookshop/.
   Madison, D. Vegetarian Cooking for Everyone. New York: Broadway Books, 1997.
   Medearis, A. S. The Ethnic Vegetarian: Traditional and Modern Recipes from Africa,
      America, and the Caribbean. New York: Rodale Inc., 2004.
   Moskowitz, I. C., and T. H. Romero. Veganomicon: The Ultimate Vegan Cookbook.


    New York: Marlowe and Company, 2007.
  Terry, B. Vegan Soul Kitchen: Fresh, Healthy, and Creative African-American Cuisine.
    Cambridge, MA: Da Capo Press, 2009.
Web Sites and Online Publications
  Boston Vegan Association. Frequently Asked Questions.
    http://bostonvegan.org/index.php?
    option=com_content&task=category&sectionid=3&id=6 0&Itemid=43.
  Johns Hopkins University Bloomberg School of Public Health. Meatless Monday
    Home Page. http://www.meatlessmonday.com/.
  Pew Commission on Industrial Farm Animal Production. Putting Meat on the Table:
    Industrial Farm Animal Production in America.
    http://www.ncifap.org/_images/PCIFAPFin.pdf.
  Physicians Committee for Responsible Medicine. Physicians Committee for
    Responsible Medicine Home Page. http://www.pcrm.org/.
  Steinfeld, H., P. Gerber, T. Wassenaar, V. Castel, V., M. Rosales. and C. de Haan.
    Livestock’s Long Shadow: Environmental Issues and Options. Rome: Food &
    Agriculture Organization of the UN, 2006.
    http://www.fao.org/docrep/010/a0701e/a0701e00.HTM.
  Union of Concerned Scientists. Union of Concerned Scientists Home Page.
    http://www.ucsusa.org/.
  Vegetarian Resource Group. The Vegetarian Resource Group Home Page.
    http://www.vrg. org/.
  Vegetarian Society. The Vegetarian Society Home Page. http://www.vegsoc.org/.
  Vegetarian Society (Singapore). The Vegetarian Society (Singapore) Home Page.
    http://www.vegetarian-society.org/.




Copyright
This book is written as a source of information only. The information contained in this
book should by no means be considered a substitute for the advice of a qualified
medical professional, who should always be consulted before beginning any new diet,
exercise, or other health program.
All efforts have been made to ensure the accuracy of the information contained in this
book as of the date published. The authors and the publisher expressly disclaim
responsibility for any adverse effects arising from the use or application of the
information contained herein.
Table 6.1, p. 150, from U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 2008 Physical
Activity Guidelines for Americans (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services, 2008).
SAVOR: Mindful Eating, Mindful Life. Copyright © 2010 by Thich Nhat Hanh and Lilian
Cheung.
All rights reserved under International and Pan-American Copyright Conventions. By
payment of the required fees, you have been granted the non-exclusive, non-
transferable right to access and read the text of this e-book on-screen. No part of this
text may be reproduced, transmitted, down-loaded, decompiled, reverse engineered, or
stored in or introduced into any information storage and retrieval system, in any form
or by any means, whether electronic or mechanical, now known or hereinafter
invented, without the express written permission of HarperCollins e-books.
EPub Edition © SEPTEMBER 2010 ISBN: 978-0-061-98145-6
HarperCollins Web site: http://www.harpercollins.com HarperCollins®, ®, and
HarperOne™ are trademarks of HarperCollins Publishers
FIRST EDITION
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data is available upon request.
ISBN 978-0-061-69769-2


10 11 12 13 14 RRD(H) 10 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1

About the Publisher
Australia
HarperCollins Publishers (Australia) Pty. Ltd.
25 Ryde Road (PO Box 321)
Pymble, NSW 2073, Australia
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com.au
Canada
HarperCollins Canada
2 Bloor Street East - 20th Floor
Toronto, ON, M4W 1A8, Canada
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.ca
New Zealand
HarperCollinsPublishers (New Zealand) Limited
P.O. Box 1
Auckland, New Zealand
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.nz
United Kingdom
HarperCollins Publishers Ltd.
77-85 Fulham Palace Road
London, W6 8JB, UK
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.co.uk
United States
HarperCollins Publishers Inc.
10 East 53rd Street
New York, NY 10022
http://www.harpercollinsebooks.com




Being Peace
THICH NHAT HANH
    Illustrated by Mayumi Oda
  Introduction by Jack Kornfield
        PARALLAX PRESS
      BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA


Parallax Press
P.O. Box 735 5
Berkeley, California 94707
www.parallax.org
Parallax Press is the publishing division
of Unified Buddhist Church, Inc.
Copyright © 1987, 2005 by the Unified Buddhist Church.
All rights reserved.
Printed in the United States of America on 50% recycled paper.
Original edition edited by Arnold Kotler.
New edition edited by Rachel Neumann.
Cover and text design by Copa & Ted 2, Inc.
Illustrations © 1987 by Mayumi Oda. The drawings in Being Peace were
created by Mayumi Oda specifically for this book. Please do not photo­
copy or otherwise reproduce them for any purposes whatsoever.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
NhiH Hanh, Thich.
 Being peace IThicb Nhat Hanh ; with illustrations by Mayumi Oda ;
[edited by Rachel NeumannJ.- [Rev. ed.J.
    p. cm.
 Originally published: Berkeley: Parallax Press, 1987.
 Collection of talks given during visit to U.S. in fall of 1985.
 ISBN 1-88837 5-40-X (pbk.)
 1. Religious life-Buddhism. 2. Buddhism-Doctrines. I. Neu­
mann, Rachel. II. Title.
 BQ5410.N45 2005
  294.3'444--dc22
                                                            2005013763
6 7 8 9 I 12 11 10 09


CONTENTS
Introduction by Jack Kornfield     ""'  9
1: Suffering Is Not Enough ""' 1 3
2: The Three Gems         ""' 21
3: Feelings and Perceptions""' 39
4: The Heart of Practice ......, 5 1
5: Working for Peace ""' 6 5
6: Interbeing  ......, 85
7: Meditation in Daily Life ......, 1 0 9




 Introduction
JACK KORNFIELD
I N T H I S WOND E R FUL BOOK, Thich Nhat Hanh teaches us the
reality of interdependence: "Even if I just clap my hands, the
effect is everywhere, in the faraway galaxies . "
   In 2007, w e celebrate the twentieth anniversary o f Being Peace.
The publication of this seminal book and the Dharma teachings
ofThich Nhat Hanh have had an extraordinary effect on D hanna
practice in the Western world, especially visible here in Amer­
ica. At once simple and yet profound, poetic and clear, compas­
sionate and inspiring, the writings and teachings of Thich Nhat
Hanh have transformed Buddhist teachings from a distant ideal
into the immediacy of the awakened heart.
   The Buddhist ancient stories tell how just the simple pres­
ence of a master is enough to touch the seeds of awakening in all
those around. Just as the fragrances of jasmine and rosebay and
sandalwood bring beauty, the fragrance of one who walks and
speaks in harmony with the Dharma brings blessings wherever
they go.
   I've seen Thich Nhat Hanh walk slowly and mindfully into a
gathering of thousands of people and the simple power of his pre­
sence radiates a joy and peace that spreads to all those present.
In the same way, the gracious and heartfelt writing you hold in
your hands calms the mind and opens the heart of wisdom.


10 / BEING PEACE
   Through his being and his words, Thich Nhat Hanh invites us
into the reality of the present. Because he is a poet, his language
has beauty, intimacy, and rich texture that illuminate the mind.
Because he is courageous, he willingly pierces our great heart of
compassion, so that we can bow to burning huts and sea pirates,
to the sorrows of the world and those who cause sorrows .
Because he is wise, his simple words speak to the most obvious
Dharma and to the truly profound levels of B uddha's awakening,
all at one time. In doing so, he simultaneously unites the great
Buddhist schools of Theravada and Mahayana, following the
rich legacy of Vietnamese Dharma.
   Thich Nhat Hanh has helped us to to see the depths of de­
pendent origination in a flower. In the midst of it all he has taught
us to breathe, to smile, to live with a free heart. And most impor­
tantly, in our troubled world he makes no false division between
inner awakening and engaged compassion. To his eye, like his
spiritual ancestor Mahatma Gandhi, every being matters, every­
thing is sacred.
   For well over half a centmy this revolutionary monk has
spread the teachings of Being Peace. This book is a treasure. If
you look deeply, you will see in it the seeds of all Thich Nhat
Hanh's most important teachings, and the seeds of your own
awakening as well.
   May it bless all who touch its beautiful words .
                                                        With Metta,
                                                     Jack Kornfield
                              Spirit Rock Meditation Center, 2005


If we are peaceful, if we are happy,
   we can blossom like a flower,
    and everyone in our family,
         our entire society,
    will benefit from, our peace,




  1
 SUFF E RING       Is NOT ENOUGH
LIFE IS FILLED with suffering, but it is also filled with many won­
ders, such as the blue sky, the sunshine, and the eyes of a baby.
To suffer is not enough. We must also be in touch with the won­
ders of life. They are within us and all around us, everywhere,
anytime .
   If we are not happy, if we are not peaceful, we can't share
peace and happiness with others, even those we love, those who
live under the same roof. If we are peaceful, if we are happy, we
can smile and blossom like a flower, and everyone in our family,
our entire society, will benefit from our peace. Do we need to
make a special effort to enjoy the beauty of the blue sky? Do we
have to practice to be able to enjoy it? No, we just enjoy it. Each
second, each minute of our lives can be like this. Wherever we
are, anytime, we have the capacity to enjoy the sunshine, the
presence of each other, even the sensation of our breathing. We
don't need to go to China to enjoy the blue sky. We don't have to
travel into the future to enjoy our breathing. We can be in touch
with these things right now. It would be a pity if we were only
aware of suffering.
   We are so busy we hardly have time to look at the people we
love, even in our own household, and to look at ourselves . Soci­
ety is organized in a way that even when we have some leisure


14 / BEING PEACE
time, we don't know how to use it to get back in touch with our­
selves. We have millions of ways to lose this precious time-we
turn on the TV, or pick up the telephone, or start the car and go
somewhere. We are not used to being with ourselves, and we act
as if we don't like ourselves and are trying to escape from our­
selves.
   Meditation is to be aware of what is going on-in our bodies,
in our feelings, in our minds, and in the world. Each day 40,000
children die of hunger. The superpowers now have more than
50,000 nuclear warheads, enough to destroy our planet many
times. Yet the sunrise is beautiful, and the rose that bloomed this
morning along the wall is a miracle. Life is both dreadful and
wonderful. To practice meditation is to be in touch with both
aspects. Please do not think we must be solemn in order to med­
itate. In fact, to meditate well, we have to smile a lot.
   Recently I was sitting with a group of children, and a boy
named Tim was smiling beautifully. I said, 'Tim, you have a very
beautiful smile," and he said, "Thank you. " I told him, "You don't
have to thank me, I have to thank you . Because of your smile, you
make life more beautiful. Instead of saying, Thank you,' you
could say, 'You're welcome.'"
   If a child smiles, if an adult smiles, that is very important. If
in our daily life we can smile, if we can be peaceful and happy,
not only we, but everyone will profit from it. This is the most
basic kind of peace work. When I see Tim smiling, I am so happy.
If he is aware that he is making other people happy, he can say,
"You're welcome . "


                                       SUFFERING IS NOT ENOUGH / 15
 From time to time, to remind ourselves to relax, to be peaceful,
we may wish to set aside some time for a retreat, a day of mind­
fulness, when we can walk s lowly, smile, drink tea with a friend,
enjoy being together as if we are the happiest people on Earth.
This is not a retreat, it is a treat. During walking meditation, dur­
ing kitchen and garden work, during sitting meditation, all day
 long, we can practice smiling. At first you may find it difficult to
 smile, and we have to think about why. Smiling means that we
are ourselves, that we have sovereignty over ourselves, that we
are not drowned in forgetfulness. This kind of smile can be seen
on the faces of Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
    I would like to offer one short poem you can recite from time
to time, while breathing and smiling:
       Breathing in, I calm my body.
       Breathing out, I smile.
       Dwelling in the present moment
       I know this is a wonderful moment.
   "Breathing in, I calm my body." Reciting this line is like drink­
ing a glass of ice water-you feel the cold, the freshness, perme­
ate your body. When I breathe in and recite this line, I actually
feel the breathing calming my body, calming my mind.
   "Breathing out, I smile. " You know the effect of a smile. A
smile can relax hundreds of muscles in your face, and relax your
nervous system. A smile makes you master of yourself. That is
why the Buddhas and bodhisattvas are always smiling. When
you smile, you realize the wonder of the smile.
   "Dwelling in the present moment." While I sit here, I don't
think of somewhere else, of the future or the past. I sit here, and


r6 / BEING PEACE
I know where I am . This is very important. We tend to be alive in
the future, not now. We say, "Wait until I finish school and get
my Ph. D . degree, and then I will be really alive . " When we have
it, and it wasn't easy to get, we say to ourselves, "I have to wait
until I have a job in order to be really alive ." And then after the
job, a car. After the car, a house. We are not capable of being alive
in the present moment. We tend to postpone being alive to the
future, the distant future, we don't know when. Now is not the
moment to be alive . We may never be alive at all in our entire life .
Therefore, the technique, if we have to speak of a technique, is
to be in the present moment, to be aware that we are here and
now, and the only moment to be alive is the present moment.
    "I know this is a wonderful moment. " This is the only moment
that is real. To be here and now, and enjoy the present moment
is our most important task. "Calming, Smiling. Present moment,
Wonderful moment." I hope you will try it.
Even though life is hard, even though it is sometimes difficult to
smile, we have to try. Just as when we wish each other "Good
morning," it must be a real "Good morning." Recently, one friend
asked me, "How can I force myself to smile when I am filled with
sorrow? It isn't natural . " I told her she must be able to smile to
her sorrow, because we are more than our sorrow. A human being
is like a television set with millions of channels. If we turn the
Buddha on, we are the Buddha. If we turn sorrow on, we are sor­
row. If we turn a smile on, we really are the smile. We can't let
just one channel dominate us. We have the seeds of everything


                                     SUFFERING IS NOT ENOUGH / 17
 in us, and we have to take the situation in hand to recover our
 own sovereignty.
    When we sit down peacefully, breathing and smiling, with
 awareness, we are our true selves, we have sovereignty over our­
 selves . When we open ourselves up to a TV program, we let our­
 selves be invaded by the program. Sometimes it is a good
program, but often it is just noisy. Because we want to have
 something other than ourselves enter us, we sit there and let a
noisy television program invade us, assail us, destroy us. Even if
our nervous system suffers, we don't have the courage to stand
up and turn it off, because if we do that, we will have to return
to our self.
    Meditation is the opposite. It helps us return to our true self.
 Practicing meditation in this kind of society is very difficult.
Everything seems to work in concert to try to take us away from
our true self. We have thousands of things, like videotapes and
music, which help us be away from ourselves . Practicing medi­
tation is to be aware, to smile, to breathe. These are on the oppo­
site side. We go back to ourselves in order to see what is going
on, because to meditate means to be aware of what is going on.
What is going on is very important.
Suppose you are expecting a child. You need to breathe and smile
for the baby. Please don't wait until your baby is born before
beginning to take care of him or her. You can take care of your
baby right now, or even sooner. If you can't smile, that's very seri­
ous. You might think, "I'm too sad. Smiling just isn't the correct
thing to do." Maybe crying or shouting would be correct, but your


18 / BEING PEACE
baby will get it-anything you are, anything you do, is for your
baby.
   Even if you do not have a baby in your womb, the seed is
already there. Even if you are not married, even if you are a man,
you should be aware that a baby is already there, the seeds of
future generations are already there. Please don't wait until the
doctors tell you that you are going to have a baby to begin to take
care of it. It is already there. Whatever you are, whatever you do,
your baby will receive it. Anything you eat, any worries that are
on your mind will be for him or her. Can you tell me that you can­
not smile? Think of the baby, and smile for him, for her, for the
future generations. Please don't tell me that a smile and your sor­
row just don't go together. It's your sorrow, but what about your
baby? It's not his sorrow, it's not her sorrow.
   C hildren understand very well that in each woman, in each
man, in each child, there is a capacity of waking up, of under­
standing, and of loving. Many children have told me that they
cannot show me anyone who does not have this capacity. Some
people allow it to develop, and some do not, but evelyone has it.
This capacity of waking up, of being aware of what is going on in
your feelings , in your body, in your perceptions, in the world, is
called Buddha nature, the capacity of understanding and loving.
Since the baby of that Buddha is in us, we should give him or her
a chance. Smiling is very important. If we are not able to smile,
then the world will not have peace. It is not by going out for a
demonstration against nuclear missiles that we can bring about
peace. It is with our capacity of smiling, breathing, and being
peace that we can make peace.






 2
THE THRE E GEMS
MANY OF US WORRY about the world situation. We don't know
when the bombs will explode. We feel that we are on the edge of
time. As individuals, we feel helpless, despairing. The situation
is so dangerous, injustice is so Widespread, the danger is so close.
In this kind of situation, if we panic , things will only become
worse . We need to remain calm, to see clearly. Meditation is to
be aware, and to try to help.
    I like to use the example of a small boat crossing the Gulf of
Siam. In Vietnam, there are many people, called boat people,
who leave the country in small boats. Often the boats are caught
in rough seas or storms, the people may panic, and boats can
sink. But if even one person aboard can remain calm, lucid,
knowing what to do and what not to do, he or she can help the
boat survive. His or her expression-face, voice-communi­
cates clarity and calmness, and people have trust in that person.
They will listen to what he or she says. One such person can save
the lives of many.
   Our world is something like a small boat. Compared with the
cosmos, our planet is a velY small boat. We are about to panic
because our situation is no better than the situation of the small
boat in the sea. You know that we have more than 50,000 nuclear
weapons. H umankind has become a velY dangerous species. We


22 / B E ING PEACE
need people who can sit still and be able to smile, who can walk
peacefully. \rVe need people like that in order to save us. Maha­
yana B uddhism says that you are that person, that each of you is
that person.
I once had a student named Thich Thanh Van, who'd entered the
monastery at the age of six. At the age of seventeen, he began to
study with me. Later, he was the first director of the School of
Youth for Social Service, where he directed thousands of young
people working during the war in Vietnam, rebuilding villages
that were destroyed, and resettling tens of thousands of refugees
fleeing the war zones . He was killed in an accident. I was in
Copenhagen when I heard of the death of my student. He was a
very gentle monk, velY brave.
   When he was a novice, six or seven years old, he saw people
come to the temple and bring cakes and bananas to offer to the
Buddha. He wanted to know how the Buddha eats bananas, so
he waited until everyone went home and the shrine was closed,
and then he peered through the door, waiting for the Buddha
to reach out his hand, take a banana, peel it, and eat it. He
waited and waited, but nothing happened. The B uddha did not
seem to eat bananas , unless he realized that someone was spy­
ing on him.
   Thich Thanh Van told me several other stories about when he
was a young boy. When he discovered that the statue of the Bud­
dha was not the Buddha, he began to ask where the Buddhas are,
because it did not seem to him that Buddhas were living among
humans. He concluded that Buddhas must not be very nice,


                                              THE THREE GEMS /23
 because when people became Buddhas, they would leave us to
go to a faraway country. I told him that Buddhas are us. They are
 made of flesh and bones, not copper or silver or gold. The Bud­
 dha statue is just a symbol of the Buddha, in the same way the
American flag is a symbol of America. The American flag is not
 the American people.
    The root word "budh" means to wake up, to know, to under­
stand. A person who wakes up and understands is called a
 Buddha. It is as simple as that. The capacity to wake up, to
understand, and to love is called Buddha nature. When Bud­
dhists say, "I take refuge in the Buddha," they are expressing trust
in their own capacity of understanding, of becoming awake. The
 Chinese and the Vietnamese say, "I go back and rely on the Bud­
dha in me." Adding "in me" makes it very clear that you yourself
are the Buddha.
    In Buddhism, there are three gems: Buddha, the awakened
one; Dharma, the way of understanding and loving; and Sangha,
the community that lives in harmony and awarenes s . The three
are interrelated, and at times it is hard to distinguish one from
the other. In everyone there is the capacity to wake up, to under­
stand, and to love. So in ourselves we find Buddha, and we also
find Dharma and Sangha. I will explain more about Dharma and
Sangha, but first I want to say something about Buddha, the one
who develops his or her understanding and loving to the highest
degree. (In Sanskrit, understanding is "prajna" and love is
"karuna" and "maitri.")
    Understanding and love aren't two separate things, they're
just one. Suppose your son wakes up one morning and sees that
it is already quite late. He decides to wake up his younger sister,
to give her enough time to eat breakfast before going to school.


24 / BEING PEACE
It happens that she is grouchy and instead of saying, 'Thank you
for waking me up," she says, "Shut up! Leave me alone ! " and
kicks him. He will probably get angry, thinking, "I woke her up
nicely. Why did she kick me?" He may want to go to the kitchen
and tell you about it, or even kick her back. But then he remem­
bers that during the night his sister coughed a lot, and he real­
izes that she must be sick. Maybe she has a cold, maybe that is
why she behaved in such a mean way. He is not angry anymore .
At that moment there is budh in him. He understands, he is
awake. When you understand, you cannot help but love. You
cannot get angry. To develop understanding, you have to practice
looking at all living beings with the eyes of compassion. When
you understand, you love . And when you love, you naturally act
in a way that can relieve the suffering of people.
    Someone who is awake, who knows, who understands, is
called a Buddha. Buddha is in evelY one of us. We can become
awake, understanding, and also loving. I often tell children that
if their mother or father is very understanding and loving, work­
ing, taking care of the family, smiling, and being lovely as a flower,
they can say, "Mommy [or Daddy], you are all B uddha today."
Two thousand five hundred years ago there was a person who
practiced in a way that his understanding and love became per­
fected, and everyone in the world recognized this. His name was
Siddhartha. When Siddhartha was velY young, he began to
think that life contained a lot of suffering, that people didn't love
and understand each other enough. So he left his home to go to
the forest to practice meditating, breathing, and smiling. H e


                                              THE THREE GEMS /25
 became a monk, and he tried to practice in order to develop his
 awakening, his understanding, and his love to the highest lev­
els . He practiced sitting meditation and walking meditation for
several years with five friends who were also monks. Although
 they were intelligent people, they made mistakes. For instance,
each day they ate only one piece of fruit-one mango, or one
guava, or one star fruit. Sometimes people exaggerate, and say
that Siddhartha ate only one sesame seed a day, but I went to the
forest in India where he practiced, and I know that is silly
because there are no sesame seeds there. I saw also the Neran­
jara River, in which he bathed several times, and the Bodhi tree
where he sat and became a Buddha. The Bodhi tree I saw is not
the same tree, it is the great-great-great-grandchild of the first
Bodhi tree.
   One day Siddhartha became so weak that he could not prac­
tice, and as he was an intelligent young man, he decided to go to
the village and get something to eat-bananas or cake or any­
thing. But as soon as he took four or five step s , he stumbled and
fainted; he lost consciousness because he was too hungry. H e
would have died, but the village chief's daughter, Sujata, who
was taking food to the forest gods, saw him and came over. She
found that he was still alive, still breathing, but very weak, and
so she took a bowl and poured some milk into his mouth. At first
Siddhartha did not react, but then his lips moved and he began
to drink the milk. He drank a whole bowl of milk, and he felt
much better and slowly sat up . He looked beautiful, because
Siddhartha was a very, very handsome person. Nowadays people
make statues of him that are not very handsome. Sometimes
they are even grouchy, without any smile on his face. But he was
a very beautiful person, and Sujata thought that he must be the


26 I BEING PEACE
god of the mountain. She kneeled down and was about to wor­
ship, but he stretched out his arm to tell her not to, and he told
her something.
   What do you think he must have said to her?
   He said, "Please give me another bowl of milk." He saw that
the milk was doing wonderful things, and he knew that once our
body is strong enough, we can succeed in meditation. The young
lady was so happy, she poured him another bowl of milk. After
that, she inquired about him, and he said that he was a monk,
trying to meditate to develop his compassion and his under­
standing to the highest level so that he could help other people.
She asked if there was anything she could do to help, and Sid­
dhartha said, "Each day at noontime, can you give me a small
bowl of rice? That would help me very much." So from that day
on, she hrollght him some rice wrappecl in banana leaves and ,
sometimes she also brought milk.
   The five other monks Siddhartha had been practicing with
despised him and thought him worthless. "Let us go somewhere
else to practice. He drinks milk, and he eats rice. He has no per­
severance." But Siddhartha did very well. Day in and day out he
meditated, and he developed his insight, his understanding, and
his compassion very, very quickly as he recovered his health.
   One day, after taking a swim in the Neranjara River, he had
the impression that he only needed one more sitting to come to
a total breakthrough, to become a fully enlightened person.
When he was about to sit down, still practicing walking medita­
tion, a buffalo boy came by. In India 2,500 years ago, water buf­
falo were used to pull the plows, and a buffalo boy's job was to
watch them, bathe and take care of them, and cut grass for them
to eat.


                                             THE THREE GEMS /27
   As the buffalo boy came by, he saw Siddhartha walking very
peacefully, and he liked him immediately. Sometimes we see
 someone we like very much, even if we don't know why. The boy
wanted to say something, but he was shy, so he came near Sid­
dhartha three or four times before saying, "Gentleman, I like you
very much ." Siddhartha looked at him and said, "I like you also."
Encouraged by this response, the boy told him, "I really want to
give you something, but I have nothing I can give you . " And Sid­
dhartha said, "You do have something that I need. You have very
beautiful green grass that youjust cut. If you want to, please give
me an armful of that grass . " The boy was so happy to be able to
give him something, and Siddhartha thanked him very much.
After the buffalo boy left, Siddhartha spread the grass into a
cushion that he could sit on.
   As he sat down, he made a firm vow, "Until I get true enlight­
enment, I shall not stand up . " With this strong determination,
he meditated all night, and when the morning star appeared in
the sky, he became a fully enlightened person, a Buddha, with
the highest capacity to understand and to love.
The Buddha stayed at that spot for two weeks, smiling and enjoy­
ing his breathing. Every day Sujata brought him rice and the
buffalo boy also came by to see him. He taught them about
understanding, loving, and being awake. There is a scripture in
the Pali Canon called the Sutra of Tending Buffalo, which lists
eleven skills a buffalo boy must have, such as recognizing his
own buffalo, making smoke to keep mosquitoes away, taking
care of wounds on the body of buffalo, helping buffalo cross


28 / BEING PEACE
rivers, and finding places with enough water and grass to eat.
After listing eleven skills, the Buddha tells the monks that med­
itation is also like this, and he lists eleven parallel skills for
monks-recognizing the five components of a human being, and
so on. M ost stories of the life of the Buddha overlook the two
weeks he stayed near the Bodhi tree, meeting with Sujata and
the buffalo boy, walking slowly, enjoying themselves. But I am
sure it happened this way. Otherwise how could the Buddha
have delivered the Sutra of Tending B uffalo? In fact, when the
buffalo boy grew up, he must have become a disciple of the Bud­
dha, and one day, as he sat in the front of the assembly, the Bud­
dha delivered that sutra.
After two weeks, the Buddha realized he had to get up from his
seat under the Bodhi tree and share his understanding and com­
passion with other people. He told Sujata and the buffalo boy, "I
am sorry, but I have to leave now. We are so happy together, but
I must go and work with the adults ."
   H e thought about how he could share his understanding and
compassion, and he remembered the five friends who had prac­
ticed with him. He walked an entire day in order to find them,
and when he happened upon their camp, they had just finished
their afternoon sitting meditation. They sat a lot. They were velY
thin by now, as you can imagine. One of them saw the Buddha
coming and said to the others, "Don't stand up if he comes.
Don't go to the gate to welcome him. Don't go and fetch water
for him to wash his feet and his hands. He didn't persevere . H e
ate rice, and he drank milk." B u t when he arrived , he was so


                                             THE THREE GEMS /29
 attractive and so peaceful that they could not help themselves
 from offering him water to wash his feet and his hands and giv­
 ing him a special seat. The Buddha told them, "Friends , I have
found a way to develop understanding and loving. Please sit
down, I'll teach you." They did not believe, at first. They said,
"Siddhartha, while we practiced together, you gave up . You
 drank milk, you ate rice. How is it possible you have become a
fully enlightened person? Please tell us. We cannot believe it."
The Buddha said, "Friends, have I ever told you a lie?" In fact,
he had never lied to anyone, and these five friends remembered
that. "I have never told you a lie. Now I am not telling you a lie.
I have become a fully enlightened person, and I'll be your
teacher. Sit down, and listen to me." And the five of them sat
down and listened to the Buddha. He gave his first Dharma talk
for adults . If you want to read his words, they are available in a
wonderful sutra (called Discourse on Turning the Wheel of the
Dharma) explaining the basic doctrines of Buddhism: suffer­
ing, the causes of suffering, the removal of suffering, and the
way to do it.
    I've read many accounts of the life of the Buddha, and I see
him as a person like us. Sometimes artists draw a B uddha in a
way that we cannot recognize him as a human being. In fact, he
is a human being. I have seen so many Buddha statues, but not
many really beautiful and simple ones . If anytime you want to
draw a picture of a Buddha, please sit down and breathe for five
or ten minutes, smiling, before you pick up the pen to draw a
Buddha. Then draw a simple Buddha, beautiful but simple, with
a smile. And if you can, draw some children sitting with him.
Buddha is young, not too grim, not too solemn, with a very light
smile on his face. We have to go in this direction, because, when


30 / BEING PEACE
we look at the Buddha, we have to like him just as the buffalo boy
and Sujata did.
When we say, "I take refuge in the Buddha," we can also under­
stand that "The Buddha takes refuge in me," because without
the second part the first part isn't complete. The Buddha needs
us for awakening, understanding, and love to be real things and
not just concepts. They must be real things that have real effects
on life. Whenever I say, "I take refuge in the Buddha, " I hear
"Buddha takes refuge in me." There is a verse for planting trees
and other plants:
       I entrust myself to earth,
       Earth entrusts herself to me.
       I entrust myself to Buddha,
       Buddha entrusts herself to me.
   "I entrust myself to earth" is like "I take refuge in the Bud­
dha. " (I identify myself with the plant.) The plant will die or b e
alive because o f t h e earth. T h e plant takes refuge in t h e earth,
the soil. But earth entrusts herself to me because each leaf that
falls down and decomposes makes the soil richer. We know that
the layer of soil that is rich and beautiful has been made by the
vegetation. If the Earth is green and beautiful, it is because of
this vegetation. Therefore, while the vegetation needs the earth,
the Earth also needs the vegetation to express herself as a beau­
tiful planet. So when we say, "I entrust myself to earth, " I am also
saying: "Earth entrusts herself to me." "I entrust myself to Bud-


                                               THE THREE GEMS / 3 I
 dha; B uddha entrusts herself t o me." It's very clear that the wis­
 dom, the understanding, and love of S hakyamuni Buddha need
 us to be real again in life. Therefore, we have a very important
 task: to realize awakening, to realize compassion, to realize
understanding.
    We are all Buddhas, because only through us can understand­
ing and love become tangible and effective. Thich Thanh Van
was killed during his effort to help other people. He was a good
 Buddhist, he was a good Buddha, because he was able to help
tens of thousands of people, victims of the war. Because of him,
awakening, understanding, and love were real things for many
people. So we can call him a Buddha body, in Sanskrit we say
"Buddhakaya." For Buddhism to be real, there must be a Buddha­
kaya, an embodiment of awakened activity. Otherwise Buddhism
is just a word. Thich Thanh Van was a Buddhakaya. S hakyamuni
was a Buddhakaya. When we realize awakening, when we are
understanding and loving, each of us is a Buddhakaya.
The second gem is the Dharma. Dharma is what the Buddha
taught. It is the way of understanding and love-how to under­
stand, how to love, how to make understanding and love into real
things . Before the Buddha passed away, he said to his students,
"Dear friends, my physical body will not be here tomorrow, but
my teaching body will always be here to help . You can consider
it as your own teacher, a teacher who never leaves you." That is
the birth of "Dharmakaya." The Dharma has a body also, the
body of the teaching. The meaning of Dharmakaya is quite
simple, although some people in M ahayana have made it very


321 BEING PEACE
complicated. Dharmakaya just means the teaching of the Bud­
dha, the way to realize understanding and love. Later it became
something like the ontological ground of being.
   Anything that can help you wake up has Buddha nature.
When I am alone and a bird calls me, I return to myself. I
breathe, and I smile, and sometimes it calls me once more. I
smile and I say to the bird, "I hear already." Not only sounds, but
sights can remind you to return to your true self. In the morning
when you open your window and see the light streaming in, you
can recognize it as the voice of the Dharma, and it becomes part
of the Dharmakaya. That is why people who are awake see the
manifestation of the Dharma in everything. A pebble, a bamboo
tree, the cry of a b aby, anything can be the voice of the Dharma
calling. We can practice like that.
   In the thirteenth century, a monk came to visit Tue Trung, the
most illustrious teacher of Buddhism in Vietnam at that time.
The monk asked him, "What is the pure, immaculate Dharma­
kaya?" Tue Trung pointed to the excrement of a horse. This was
an irreverent approach to D harmakaya, because people were
using the word "immaculate" to describe it. You can't use words
to describe the Dharmakaya. Even though we say that it is
immaculate and pure, that doesn't mean it is separate from
things that are impure. Reality, ultimate reality, is free from all
adjectives, either pure or impure. So his response was to shake
up the monk's mind, so he could cleanse himself of all these
adjectives in order to see into the nature of the Dharmakaya. A
teacher is also part of the Dharmakaya because she or he helps
us be awake. The way she looks, the way she lives her daily life,
the way she deals with people, animals, and plants helps us real­
ize understanding and love in our life.


                                                 THE THREE G E MS /33
    There are many ways of teaching: teaching by word s , teach­
ing by books, teaching by tape recorders. I have a friend who is
a Zen teacher in Vietnam, quite well-known. He isn't allowed to
preach in Ho Chi Minh City, because if he teaches there, too
many people come to hear him, and the government doesn't like
 that. Therefore, people make tape recordings of his talks, and he
has become known as Cassette Monk! He is still in Vietnam. The
government chased him away from his monastelY, so he had to
go to another place to teach .
    Even if we can't hear the teachings of the cassette monk, his
being is very helpful to us in being awake, for he is part of the
Dharmakaya. D harmakaya is not just expressed in word s , in
sounds. It can express itself in just being. Sometimes if we don't
do anything, we help more than if we do a lot. We call that non­
action. It is like the calm person on a small boat in a storm. That
person does not have to do much, just to be himself, and the sit­
uation can change. That is also an aspect of Dharmakaya: not
talking, not teaching, just being.
   This is true not only of humans, but other species as well.
Look at the trees in our yard. An oak tree is an oak tree. That is
all it has to do. If an oak tree is less than an oak tree, then we are
all in trouble. Therefore, the oak tree is preaching the Dharma.
Without doing anything, not serving in the School of Youth for
Social S ervice, not preaching, not even sitting in meditation, the
oak tree is velY helpful to all of us just by being there. Every time
we look at the oak tree we have confidence. During the summer
we sit under it and we feel cool, relaxed. We know that if the oak
tree is not there, and all the other trees are not there, we will not
have good air to breathe.
   In our former lives, we were trees . Maybe we have even been


34 / BEING PEACE
oak trees ourselves . This isn't just Buddhist theory; it's science.
The human species is a very young species-we appeared on the
Earth only recently. Before that, we were rock, we were gas, we
were minerals, we were single-celled beings . Vie were plants, we
were trees, and now we have become humans. We have to recall
our past existences. This is not difficult. You just sit down and
breathe and look, and you can see your past existences. When
we shout at the oak tree, the oak tree isn't offended. When we
praise the oak tree, it doesn't raise its nose. We can learn the
Dharma from the oak tree; therefore, the oak tree is part of our
Dharmakaya. We can learn from everything that is around, that
is in us. Even if we aren't at a meditation center, we can still prac­
tice at home, because around us the Dharma is present. Every­
thing is preaching the Dharma. Each pebble, each leaf, each
flower is preaching the Saddharma Pundarika Sutra.
The Sangha is the community that lives in harmony and aware­
ness . "Sanghakaya" is a new Sanskrit term. The Sangha needs a
body also. When you are with your family and you practice smil­
ing, breathing, recognizing the Buddha body in yourself and your
children, then your family becomes a Sangha. If you have a bell
in your home, the bell becomes part of your S anghakaya,
because the bell helps you to practice. If you have a cushion,
then the cushion also becomes part of the Sanghakaya. Many
things help us practice. The air, for breathing. If you have a park
or a riverbank near your home, you are very fortunate because
you can enjoy practicing walking meditation. You have to dis­
cover your Sanghakaya, inviting a friend to come and practice


                                              THE THREE GEMS /35
with you, have tea meditation, sit with you, join you for walking
meditation. All those efforts are to establish your Sanghakaya at
 home. Practice is easier if you have a Sanghakaya.
   Siddhartha, the Buddha-to-be, while practicing with other
people, began to drink milk, and the five monks who were with
him went away. So he made the Bodhi tree into his Sanghakaya.
 He made the buffalo boy, Sujata, the river, the trees , and the
birds around him into his Sanghakaya. There are those in Viet­
nam who live in reeducation camp s . They don't have a Sangha.
They don't have a Zen center. But they practice. They have to
look upon other things as part of their Sanghakaya. I know of peo­
ple who practiced walking meditation in their prison cells . They
told me this after they got out of the camp. So while we are lucky,
while we are still capable of finding so many elements to set up
our Sanghakaya, we should do so. A friend, our own children, our
own brother or sister, our house, the trees in our backyard, all of
them can be part of our Sanghakaya.
   Practicing Buddhism, practicing meditation is for us to be
serene and happy, understanding and loving. In that way we
work for the peace and happiness of our family and our society.
If we look closely, the Three Gems are actually one. In each of
them, the other two are already there. In Buddha, there is Bud­
dhahood, there is the Buddha body. In Buddha there is the
Dharma body because without the Dharma body, he could not
have become a Buddha. In the Buddha there is the Sangha body
because he had breakfast with the Bodhi tree, with the other
trees, the birds, and the environment. In a meditation center, we
have a Sangha body, Sanghakaya, because the way of under­
standing and compassion is practiced there. Therefore the
Dharma body is present, the way, the teaching is present. But the


36 I BEING PEACE
teaching cannot become real without the life and body of each
of us. So the Buddhakaya is also present. If Buddha and Dharma
are not present, it is not a Sangha.
   Without you, the Buddha is not real, it is just an idea. With­
out you, the Dharma cannot be practiced. It has to be practiced
by someone. Without each of you, the Sangha cannot be. That
is why when we say, "I take refuge in the Buddha," we also hear,
"The Buddha takes refuge in me. " "I take refuge in the Dharma.
The Dharma takes refuge in me. I take refuge in the Sangha. The
Sangha takes refuge in me."




I

 3
FEELINGS AND PERCEPTIONS
ACCORDING TO BUDDHISM, human beings are composed of five
aggregates : form, which means our body, including the five sense
organs and the nervous system; feelings ; perceptions; mental
formations; and consciousness . I would like to explain about
feelings and perceptions .
   Every day w e have many feelings. Sometimes w e are happy,
sometimes we are sorrowful, sometimes angry, irritated or afraid;
and these feelings fill our mind and heart. One feeling lasts for a
while, and then another comes, and another, as if there is a
stream of feelings for us to deal with. Practicing meditation is to
be aware of each feeling.
   The Abhidharma writings on Buddhist psychology say that
feelings are of three kinds: pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral.
When we step on a thorn, we have an unpleasant feeling. When
someone says something nice to us, "You are velY smart," or "You
are very beautiful," we have a pleasant feeling. And there are
neutral feelings, such as when you sit there and don't feel either
pleasant or unpleasant. But I have read the Abhidharma and
have practiced Buddhism, and I find this analysis not correct. A
so-called neutral feeling can become very pleasant. If you sit
down, very beautifully, and practice breathing and smiling, you
can be very happy. When you sit in this way, aware that you have


40 / BEING PEACE
a feeling of well-being, that you don't have a toothache, that your
eyes are capable of seeing forms and colors, isn't it wonderful?
    For some people, working is unpleasant, and they suffer when
they have to work. For other people, if they are forbidden from
working, it is unpleasant. I do many kinds of work, and if you
forbid me from binding books, from gardening, from writing
poetry, from practicing walking meditation, from teaching chil­
dren, I will be VelY unhappy. To me, work is pleasant. Pleasant or
unpleasant depends on our way of looking.
   We call seeing a neutral feeling. Yet someone who has lost her
sight would give anything to be able to see, and if suddenly she
could, she would consider it a miraculous gift. We who have eyes
capable of seeing many forms and colors are often unhappy. If
we want to practice, we can go out and look at leaves, flowers ,
children, and clouds, and be happy. VVhether or not we are happy
depends on our awareness. When you have a toothache, you
think that not having a toothache will make you very happy. But
when you don't have a toothache, often you are still not happy. If
you practice awareness, you suddenly become velY rich, velY
velY happy. Practicing Buddhism is a clever way to enjoy life.
Happiness is available. Please help yourself to it. All of us have
the capacity of transforming neutral feelings into pleasant feel­
ings, very pleasant feelings that can last a long time. This is what
we practice during sitting and walking meditation . If you are
happy, all of us will profit from it. Society will profit from it. All
living beings will profit from it.
   On the wooden board outside of the meditation hall in Zen
monasteries, there is a four-line inscription. The last line is,
"Don't waste your life ." Our lives are made of days and hours, and
each hour is precious . Have we wasted our hours and our days?


                                    FEELINGS AND PERCEPTIONS /41
Are we wasting our lives? These are important questions. Prac­
 ticing Buddhism is to be alive in each moment. When we prac­
 tice sitting or walking, we have the means to do it perfectly.
 During the rest of the day, we also practice. I t is more difficult,
but it is possible. The sitting and the walking must be extended
 to the non-walking, non-sitting moments of our day. That is the
basic principle of meditation.
Perceiving includes our ideas or concepts about reality. When
you look at a pencil, you perceive it, but the pencil itself may be
different from the pencil in your mind. If you look at me, the me
in myself may be different from the me you perceive. In order to
have a correct perception, we need to have a direct encounter.
    When you look at the night sky, you might see a very beauti­
ful star, and smile at it. But a scientist may tell you that the star
is no longer there, that it was extinct ten million years ago. So our
perception is not correct. When we see a very beautiful sunset,
we are very happy, perceiving that the sun is there with us. I n fact
it was already behind the mountain eight minutes ago. It takes
eight minutes for the sunshine to reach our planet. The hard fact
is that we never see the sun in the present, we only see the sun
of the past. Suppose while walking in the twilight, you see a
snake, and you scream, but when you shine your flashlight on it,
it turns out to be a rope. This is an error of perception. During
our daily lives we have many misperceptions. If I don't under­
stand you, I may be angry at you all the time. We are not capable
of understanding each other, and that is the main source of
human suffering.


42 1 BEING PEACE
   A man was rowing his boat upstream on a very misty morning.
Suddenly, he saw another boat coming downstream, not trying
to avoid him. It was coming straight at him. He shouted, "Be
careful ! Be careful!" but the boat came right into him, and his
boat was almost sunk. The man became very angry, and began to
shout at the other person, to give him a piece of his mind. But
when he looked closely, he saw that there was no one in the other
boat. It turned out that the boat just got loose and went down­
stream. All his anger vanished, and he laughed and he laughed.
If our perceptions are not correct, they may give us a lot of bad
feelings . Buddhism teaches us how to look at things deeply in
order to understand their own true nature, so that we will not be
misled into suffering and bad feelings.
The Buddha taught that this is like this, because that is like that.
You see? Because you smile, I am happy. This is like this, there­
fore that is like that. And that is like that, because this is like this.
This is called dependent co-arising.
   Suppose you and I are friends. (In fact, I hope we are friends . )
M y well-being, m y happiness depends very much o n you, and
your well-being, your happines s , depends upon me. I am respon­
sible for you, and you are responsible for me. Anything I do
wrong, you will suffer, and anything you do wrong, I have to suf­
fer. Therefore, in order to take care of you, I have to take care of
myself.
   There is a story in the Pali Canon about a father and a daugh­
ter who performed in the circus. The father would place a very
long bamboo stick on his forehead, and his daughter would


                                     FEELI NGS AND PERCEPTIONS / 43
 climb to the top of the stick. When they did this, people gave
 them some money to buy rice and cuny to eat . One day the father
 told the daughter, "My dear daughter, we have to take care of
 each other. You have to take care of your father, and I have to take
 care of you, so that we will be safe. Our performance is velY dan­
 gerous ." Because if she fell, both would not be able to earn their
 living. If she fell, then broke her leg, they wouldn't have anything
 to eat. "My daughter, we have to take care of each other so we
 can continue to earn our living."
    The daughter was wise. She said, "Father, you should say it
 this way: 'Each one of us has to take care of himself or herself, so
 that we can continue to earn our living.' Because during the per­
formance, you take care of yourself, you take care of yourself
only. You stay very stable, very alert. That will help me. And if
when I climb I take care of myself, I climb very carefully, I do not
let anything wrong happen to me. That is the way you should say
it, Father. You take good care of yourself, and I take good care of
myself. In that way we can continue to earn our living." The Bud­
dha agreed that the daughter was right.
    So we are friends, and our happiness depends on each other.
According to that teaching I have to take care of myself, and you
take care of yourself. That way we help each other. And that is
the most correct perception. If I only say, "Don't do this, you have
to do that," and I don't take care of myself, I can do many wrong
things, and that does not help. I have to take care of myself,
knowing that I am responsible for your happiness, and if you do
the same, everything will be all right. This is the Buddha's teach­
ing about perception, based on the principle of dependent co­
arising. Buddhism is easy to learn I
    The Buddha had a special way to help us understand the


44 I BEING PEACE
object of our perception. He said that in order to understand, you
have to be one with what you want to understand. This is doable.
About fifteen years ago, I used to help a committee for orphans,
victims of the war in Vietnam. From Vietnam, they sent out
applications, one sheet of paper with a small picture of a child in
the corner, telling the name, the age, and the conditions of the
orphan. We were supposed to translate it from Vietnamese into
French, English, Dutch, or German, in order to seek a sponsor,
so that the child would have food to eat and books for school, and
be put into the family of an aunt or an uncle or a grandparent.
Then the committee could send the money to the family mem­
ber to help take care of the child.
   Each day I helped translate about thirty applications into
French. The way I did it was to look at the picture of the child. I
didn't read the application, I just took time to look at the picture
of the child. Usually after only thirty or forty seconds, I became
one with the child. I don't know how or why, but it's always like
that. Then I would pick up the pen and translate the words from
the application onto another sheet. Afterwards I realized that it
was not me who had translated the application; it was the child
and me, who had become one. Looking at his face or her face, I
got motivated and I became him and he became me, and
together we did the translation. I t's very natural . You don't have
to practice a lot of meditation to be able to do that. You just look,
you allow yourself to be, and then you lose yourself in the child,
and the child in you. This is one example which illustrates the
way of perception recommended by Buddha. In order to under­
stand something, you have to be one with that something.
   The French language has the word comprendre, which means
to understand, to know, to comprehend. "Com" means to be one,


                                   FEELINGS AND PERCEPTIONS / 45
 to be together, and "prendre" means to take or to grasp. To under­
 stand something is to take that thing up and to be one with it.
The Indians have a wonderful example. If a grain of salt would
like to measure the degree of saltiness of the ocean, to have a per­
 ception of the saltiness of the ocean, it drops itself into the ocean
and becomes one with it, and the perception is perfect.
    Nowadays, nuclear physicists have begun to feel the same
way. When they get deeply into the world of subatomic particles,
they see their mind in it. An electron is first of all your concept
of the electron. The object of your study is no longer separated
from your mind. Your mind is very much in it. Modern physicists
think that the word "observer" is no longer valid, because an
observer is distinct from the object he observes. They have dis­
covered that if you retain that kind of distinction, you cannot go
very far in subatomic nuclear science. So they have proposed the
word "participant. " You are not an observer, you are a participant.
That is the way I always feel when I give a lecture. I don't want
the audience to be outside, to observe, to listen only. I want them
to be one with me, to practice, to breathe. The speaker and the
people who listen must become one in order for right perception
to take place. Nonduality means "not two," but "not two" also
means "not one . " That is why we say "nondual" instead of "one. "
Because i f there i s one, there are two. If you want t o avoid two,
you have to avoid one also.
    In the Satipatthana Sutta, the basic manual on meditation
from the time of the Buddha, it is recorded, "The practitioner will
have to contemplate body in the body, feelings in the feelings,
mind in the mind, objects of mind in the objects of mind. " The
words are clear. The repetition, "body in the body," is not just to
underline the importance of it. Contemplating body in the body


46 / BEING PEACE
means that you do not stand outside of something to contem­
plate it. You must be one with it, with no distinction between the
contemplator and the contemplated. Contemplating body in the
body means that you should not look on your body as the object
of your contemplation. You have to be one with it. The message
is clear. "Nonduality" is the key word for Buddhist meditation.
To sit is not enough. We have to he at the same time. To be what?
To be is to be a something, you cannot be a nothing. To eat, you
have to eat something, you cannot just eat nothing. To be aware
is to be aware of something. To be angry is to be angry at some­
thing. So to be is to be something, and that something is what is
going on: in your body, in your mind, in your feelings, and in the
world.
   While sitting, you sit and you are. You are what? You are the
breathing. Not only the one who breathes-you are the breath­
ing and the smiling. It is like a television set of one million chan­
nels. When you turn the breathing on, you are the breathing.
When you turn the irritation on, you are the irritation. You are
one with it. Irritation and breathing are not things outside of you .
You contemplate them i n them, because you are one with them.
   If I have a feeling of anger, how would I meditate on that? How
would I deal with it, as a Buddhist, or as an intelligent person? I
would not look upon anger as something foreign to me that I have
to fight, to have surgery in order to remove it. I know that anger
is me, and I am anger. Nonduality, not two. I have to deal with
my anger with care, with love, with tenderness, with nonvio­
lence. Because anger is me, I have to tend my anger as I would


                                    FEELINGS AND PERCEPTIONS / 47
 tend a younger brother or sister, with love, with care, because I
 myself am anger, I am in it, I am it. In Buddhism we do not con­
sider anger, hatred, greed as enemies we have to fight, to destroy,
 to annihilate. If we annihilate anger, we annihilate ourselves.
 Dealing with anger in that way would be like transforming your­
 self into a battlefield, tearing yourself into parts, one part taking
 the side of Buddha, and one part taking the side of Mara. If you
 struggle in that way, you do violence to yourself. If you cannot be
compassionate to yourself, you will not be able to be compas­
sionate to others. When we get angry, we have to produce aware­
ness: "I am angly. Anger is in me. I am anger. " That is the first
thing to do.
    In the case of a minor irritation, the recognition of the pres­
ence of the irritation, along with a smile �nd a few breaths will
usually be enough to transform the irritation into something
more positive, like forgiveness, understanding, and love. hTita­
tion is a destructive energy. We cannot destroy the energy; we
can only convert it into a more constructive energy. Forgiveness
is a constructive energy. Understanding is a constructive energy.
Suppose you are in the desert, and you only have one glass of
muddy water. You have to transform the muddy water into clear
water to drink, you cannot just throw it away. So you let it settle
for a while, and clear water will appear. In the same way, we have
to convert anger into some kind of energy that is more construc­
tive, because anger is you. Without anger you have nothing left.
That is the work of meditation.
    Earlier I gave the example of a big brother who got angry at his
sister at first and then found out that she has a fever, and he
understood and became concerned, and he tried to help her. So
the destructive energy of anger, because of understanding, is


48 / BEING PEACE
transformed into the energy of love. Meditation on your anger is
first of all to produce awareness of anger, "I am the anger," and
then to look deeply into the nature of anger. Anger is born from
ignorance, and is a strong ally of ignorance.
Perceptions are perceptions of our body, feelings, mind, nature,
and society. We should have a good perception of the oak tree in
order to see its Buddha nature, its function as a Dharma teacher.
We have to perceive our political and economic systems cor­
rectly in order to see what is going wrong. Perception is very
important for our well-being, for our peace. Perception should
be free from emotions and ignorance, free from illusions.
    I n Buddhism, knowledge is regarded as an obstacle to under­
standing, like a block of ice that obstructs water from flowing. It
is said that if we take one thing to be the truth and cling to it, even
if truth itself comes in person and knocks at our door, we won't
open it. For things to reveal themselves to us, we need to be ready
to abandon our views about them.
   The Buddha told a story about this. A young widower, who
loved his five-year-old son very much, was away on business, and
bandits came, burned down his whole village, and took his son
away. When the man returned, he saw the ruins, and panicked.
He took the charred corpse of an infant to be his own child, and
he began to pull his hair and beat his chest, crying uncontrol­
lably. He organized a cremation ceremony, collected the ashes
and put them in a very beautiful velvet bag. Working, sleeping,
eating, he always carried the bag of ashes with him.
    One day his real son escaped from the robbers and found his


                                    FEELINGS AND PERCEPTIONS / 49
way home. He arrived at his father's new cottage at midnight, and
knocked at the door. You can imagine at that time, the young
father was still c arrying the bag of ashes, and crying. He asked,
"Who is there?" And the child answered, "It's me, Papa. Open
the door, it's your son . " In his agitated state of mind the father
 thought that some mischievous boy was making fun of him, and
he shouted at the child to go away, and he continued to cry. The
boy knocked again and again, but the father refused to let him
in. Some time p assed, and finally the child left. From that time
on, father and son never saw one another. After telling this story,
the B uddha said, "Sometime, somewhere you take something to
be the truth. If you cling to it so much, when the truth comes in
person and knocks at your door, you will not open it."
   Guarding lmowledge is not a good way to understand. Under­
standing means to throw away your lmowledge. You have to be
able to transcend your knowledge the way people climb a ladder.
If you are on the fifth step of a ladder and think that you are very
high, there is no hope for you to climb to the sixth. The technique
is to release. The Buddhist way of understanding is always let­
ting go of our views and knowledge in order to transcend. This is
the most important teaching. That is why I use the image of
water to talk about understanding. Knowledge is solid; it blocks
the way of understanding. Water can flow, it can penetrate any­
thing.




 4
THE H EART OF PRACTIC E
 MEDITATION i s not to get out o f society, to escape from society,
but to prepare for a reentry into society. We call this "engaged
 Buddhism." When we go to a meditation center, we may have
the impression that we leave everything behind-family, society,
and all the complications involved with them-and come as an
individual in order to practice and to search for peace . This is
 already an illusion, because in B uddhism there is no such thing
as an individual.
    Just as a piece of paper is the fruit, the combination of many
elements that can be called non-paper elements, the individ­
ual i s made of non-individual elements. If you are a poet, you
will see clearly that there is a cloud floating in this sheet of
paper. Without a cloud there will be no water; without water,
the trees cannot grow; and without trees, you cannot make
paper. So the cloud is in here . The existence of this page is
dependent on the existence of a cloud. Paper and cloud are so
close. Let us think of other things, like sunshine. Sunshine is
very important because the forest cannot grow without sun­
shine, and we humans cannot grow without sunshine. So the
logger needs sunshine in order to cut the tree, and the tree needs
sunshine in order to be a tree. Therefore you can see sunshine
in this sheet of paper. And if you look more deeply, with the eyes


52 / BEING PEACE
of a bodhisattva, with the eyes of those who are awake, you see
not only the cloud and the sunshine in it, but that everything is
here: the wheat that became the bread for the logger to eat, the
logger's father- everything is in this sheet of paper.
   The Avatamsaka Sutra tells us that you cannot point to one
thing that does not have a relationship with this sheet of paper.
So we say, "A sheet of paper is made of non-paper elements. " A
cloud is a non-paper element. The forest is a non-paper element.
Sunshine is a non-paper element. The paper is made of all the
non-paper elements to the extent that if we return the non-paper
elements to their sources, the cloud to the sky, the sunshine to
the sun, the logger to his father, the paper is empty. Empty of
what? Empty of a separate self. I t has been made by all the non­
self elements, non-paper elements, and if all these non-paper
elements are taken out, it is truly empty, empty of an independ­
ent self. Empty, in this sense, means that the paper is full of
everything, the entire cosmo s . The presence of this tiny sheet of
paper proves the presence of the whole cosmos .
   In the same way, the individual is made of non-individual ele­
ments. How do you expect to leave everything behind when you
enter a meditation center? The kind of suffering that you carry
in your heart, that is society itself. You bring that with you, you
bring society with you. You bring all of us with you . When you
meditate, it is not just for yourself, you do it for the whole soci­
ety. You seek solutions to your problems not only for yourself, but
for all of us.
   Leaves are usually looked upon as the children of the tree. Yes ,
they are children o f the tree, born from the tree, b u t they are also
mothers of the tree. The leaves combine raw sap, water, and min­
erals, with sunshine and gas, and convert it into a variegated sap


                                        THE HEART OF PRACTIC E / 53
that can nourish the tree. In this way, the leaves become the
mother of the tree. We are all children of society, but we are also
 mothers. We have to nourish society. If we are uprooted from
society, we cannot transform it into a more livable place for us
and for our children. The leaves are linked to the tree by a stem.
The stem is very important.
   I have been gardening in our community for many years, and
I know that sometimes it is difficult to transplant cuttings. Some
plants do not transplant easily, so we use a kind of vegetable hor­
mone to help them be rooted in the soil more easily. I wonder
whether there is a kind of powder, something that may be found
in meditation practice that can help people who are uprooted be
rooted again in society. Meditation is not an escape from society.
Meditation is to equip oneself with the capacity to reintegrate
into society, in order for the leaf to nourish the tree.
Something has happened in some meditation centers. A num­
ber of young people found themselves ill at ease with society, so
they left in order to come to a meditation center. They ignored
the reality that they did not come to the meditation center as an
individual. Coming together in a meditation center, they form
another kind of society. As a society, it has problems like other
societies. B efore entering the meditation center, they had hoped
that they could find peace in meditation. Now, practicing and
forming another kind of society, they discover that this society is
even more difficult than the larger society. It is composed of
alienated people. After some years, they feel frustrated, worse
than before coming to the meditation center. This is because we


54 ! BEING PEACE
misunderstand meditation, we misunderstand the purpose of
meditation. Meditation is for everyone and not just for the per­
son who meditates.
   Bringing children into a meditation center is very natural. In
Plum Village, children practice with adults. From time to time,
we open the door for guests to come and practice with us, and
bring their children. We especially take care of the children.
When the children are happy, the adults are happy. One day I
overheard the children telling each other, "How come our par­
ents are so nice here?" I have a friend who has been practicing
meditation for fourteen years, and he has never shown his
daughter how to meditate. You cannot meditate alone. You have
to do it with your children. If your children are not happy, do not
smile, you cannot smile. When you make a peaceful step, that is
for you, but it is also for the children, and for the world.
I think that our society is a difficult place to live. If we are not
careful, we can become uprooted, and once uprooted, we can­
not help change society to make it more livable. Meditation is a
way of helping us stay in society. This is very important. We have
seen people who are alienated from society and cannot be rein­
tegrated into society. We know that this can happen to us if we
are not careful.
   I have learned that many of the Buddhist practitioners in
America are young and intellectual, and have come to Buddhism
not by the door of faith, but by the door of psychology. I know
people in the Western world suffer a great deal psychologically,
and that is why many have become Buddhists, practicing medi-


                                         THE HEART OF PRACTICE / 55
 tation in order to solve psychological problems . Many are still in
 society, but some have been uprooted. H aving lived for quite
some time in this society, I myself feel that I cannot get along
with this society very well. There are so many things that make
me want to withdraw, to go back to myself. But my practice helps
me remain in society, because I am aware that if I leave society,
I will not be able to help change it. I hope that those who are prac­
ticing Buddhism succeed in keeping their feet on earth, staying
in society. That is our hope for peace.
I wrote a poem over thirty years ago, when I was twenty-seven or
twenty-eight, about a brother who suffered so much he had to
drop out of society and go to a meditation center. Since the Bud­
dhist temple is a place of compassion, they welcomed him.
When someone is suffering so much, when he or she comes to a
meditation center, the first thing is to give some kind of comfort.
The people in the temple were compassionate enough to let him
come and have a place to ClY. How long, how many days, how
many years did he need to Cly? We don't know. But finally he took
refuge in the meditation center and did not want to go back to
society. He had had enough of it. He thought that he had found
some peace, but one day I myself came and burned his medita­
tion center, which was only a small hut: his last shelter! In his
understanding, he had nothing else outside of that small cottage.
He had nowhere to go because society was not his. He thought
he had come to seek his own emancipation, but, in the light of
Buddhism, there is no such thing as individual self. As we know,
when you go into a Buddhist center, you bring with you all the


56 / BEING PEACE
scars, all the wounds from society, and you bring the whole soci­
ety as wel l . In this poem, I am the young man, and I am also the
person who came and burned down the cottage.
      I WILL SAY I WANT IT ALL
      If you ask how much do I want,
      I'll tell you that I want it all.
      This morning, you and I
      and all men
      are flowing into the marvelous stream
      of oneness.
      Small pieces of imagination as we are,
      we have come a long way to find ourselves
      and for ourselves, in the dark, the illusion
      of emancipation.
      This morning, my brother is back from his
      long adventure.
      He kneels before the altar,
      his eyes full of tears.
      His soul is longing for a shore to set anchor at
      (a yearning I once had).
      Let him kneel there and weep .
      Let him cry his heart out.
      Let him have his refuge there for a thousand years,
      enough to dry all his tears.


                                            THE HEART OF PRACTICE / 57
       One night, I will come
       and set fire to his shelter,
       the small cottage on the hill.
       My fire will destroy everything
       and remove his only life raft after a shipwreck.
       In the utmost anguish of his soul,
       the shell will break.
      The light of the burning hut will witness
      his glorious deliverance.
       I will wait for him
      beside the burning cottage.
      Tears will run down my cheeks.
      I will be there to contemplate his new being.
      And as I hold his hands in mine
      and ask him how much he wants,
      he will smile and say that he wants it all­
      just as I did.
   To me, a meditation center is where you get back to yourself,
you get a clearer understanding of reality, you get more strength
in understanding and love, and you prepare for your reentry into
society. If it's not like that, it's not a real meditation center. As we
develop real understanding, we can reenter society and make a
real contribution.
We have many compartments in our lives. When we practice
sitting meditation and when we do not practice sitting, these


58 I BEING PEACE
two periods of time are so different from each other. While
sitting, we practice intensively and while we are not sitting, we
do not practice intensively. In fact, we practice non-practice
intensively. There is a wall which separates the two, practicing
and non-practicing. Practicing is only for the practice period and
non-practicing is only for the non-practicing period. How can we
mix the two together? How can we bring meditation out of the
meditation hall and into the kitchen, and the office? How can
the sitting influence the non-sitting time? If a doctor gives you
an injection, not only your arm but your whole body benefits
from it. If you practice one hour of sitting a day, that hour should
be for all twenty-four hours, and not just for that hour. One smile,
one breath should be for the benefit of the whole day, not just for
that moment. We must practice in a way that removes the bar­
rier between practice and non-practice.
   When we walk in the meditation hall, we make careful steps ,
very slowly. B u t when w e g o to the airport, w e are quite another
person. We walk very differently, less mindfully. How can we
practice at the airport and in the market? That is engaged Bud­
dhism. Engaged Buddhism does not only mean to use Buddhism
to solve social and political problems , protesting against the
bombs, and protesting against social injustice. First of all we
have to bring Buddhism into our daily lives. I have a friend who
breathes between telephone calls, and it helps her very much .
Another friend does walking meditation between business
appointments, walking mindfully between buildings in down­
town Denver. Passersby smile at him, and his meetings , even
with difficult persons, often turn out to be very pleasant, and very
successful.
   We should be able to bring the practice from the meditation


                                       THE HEART OF PRACTICE I 59
hall into our daily lives. How can we practice to penetrate our
feelings, our perceptions during daily life? We don't deal with our
perceptions and our feelings only during sitting practice. We
have to deal with them all the time. We need to discuss among
ourselves how to do it. Do you practice breathing between phone
calls? Do you practice smiling while cutting carrots? Do you
practice relaxation after hours of hard work? These questions are
very practical. If you know how to apply Buddhism to dinner
time, leisure time, sleeping time, I think Buddhism will become
engaged in your daily life. Then it will have a tremendous effect
on social concerns. Buddha, Dharma, and Sangha become the
matters of everyday life, each minute, each hour of our daily life,
and not just a description of something far away.
Our mind is like a river, with many thoughts and feelings flow­
ing along. From time to time, it is helpful to recite a gatha, a
short verse , to remind us what is going on. When we focus our
mind on a gatha, the gatha is our mind at that moment. The
gatha fills our mind for half a second, or ten seconds, or one
minute, and then we may have another gatha a little further
downstream. While eating a silent meal, I recite a gatha to
myself, and then I eat something. When the plate is empty, I
recite another gatha, and drink a cup of tea. Suppose there is
one hour of sitting in meditation, and then five hours of non­
sitting, followed by three more hours of sitting, intensive prac­
tice. What is the relationship between the practice time and the
non-practice time, the practice mind and the non-practice
mind? Sitting is like a gatha, a long silent gatha. ( M aybe it's not


60 ! BEING PEACE
so silent . ) M y main concern is the effect the gatha has on the
non-gatha state of mind.
   An automobile driver needs signs from time to time to show
him the way. The sign and the road are one, because you don't
just use the sign only where it appears, you apply it all along the
way, until the next sign. There is no difference between the signs
and the road. That is what we should do while practicing gathas
and sitting. Gathas help us get back to ourselves, and as soon as
the gatha ends, we continue along the stream. If we do not real­
ize the unity of the gathas and the rest of our life, of the signs and
the road, then we would have in ourselves what the French call
cloisons etanches. It means absolute compartmentalization, with
no communication whatsoever between the two c ompartments.
Not permeable. Between the gatha and the non-gatha state of
mind is an absolute distinction, like the sitting and the non­
sitting.
   H ow can the gathas affect the non-gatha moments? How will
the sitting permeate the non-sitting hours? We must learn to
practice so that one gatha, one minute of sitting will influence
the rest of the day, one step made in walking meditation will have
an effect on the rest of the day. Every action, every thought has
an effect. Even if I just clap my hands, the effect is evelywhere,
even in faraway galaxies . Every sitting, every walking, every smile
will have an effect on your own daily life, and the life of other
people also, and practice must be based on that.
When we practice sitting and walking, we must pay attention to
the quality of the sitting and the walking, not the quantity. We


                                          THE HEART OF PRACTICE /6r
 have to practice intelligently. We need to create the kind of prac­
 tice that will fit our circumstance.
    There is a stOlY I would like to tell you about a woman who
 practices the invocation of the Buddha Amitabha's name . She is
very tough, and she practices the invocation three times daily,
 using a wooden drum and a bell, reciting "Namo Amitabha Bud­
 dha" for one hour each time. When she arrives at one thousand
 times, she invites the bell to sound. (In Vietnamese, we don't say
"strike" or "hit" a bel l . ) Although she has been doing this for ten
years , her personality has not changed. She is still quite mean,
 shouting at people all the time.
    A friend wanted to teach her a lesson, so one afternoon when
she had just lit the incense, invited the bell to sound three times,
and was beginning to recite "N amo Amitabha Buddha," he came
to her door, and said, "Mrs. Nguyen, Mrs. N guyen!" She found
it velY annoying because this was her time of practice, but he just
stood at the front gate shouting her name. She said to herself, "I
have to struggle against my anger, so I will ignore that," and she
went on, "Namo Amitabha Buddha, N amo Amitabha Buddha."
    The gentleman continued to shout her name, and her anger
became more and more oppressive. She struggled against it,
wondering, "Should I stop my recitation and go and give him a
piece of my mind?" But she continued chanting, and she strug­
gled velY hard. Fire mounted in her, but she still tried to chant
"Namo Amitabha Buddha." The gentleman knew it, and he con­
tinued to shout, "Mrs. Nguyen! Mrs . Nguyen ! "
    S h e could not bear it any longer. S h e threw down t h e bell and
the drum. She slammed the door, went out to the gate and said,
"Why, why do you behave like that? Why do you call my name
hundreds of times like that?" The gentleman smiled at her and


62 / BEING PEACE
said, " I just called your name for ten minutes, and you are so
angry. You have been calling the Buddha's name for ten years.
Think how angly he must be by now!"
   The problem is not to do a lot, but to do it correctly. If you do
it correctly, you become kinder, nicer, more understanding and
loving. When we practice sitting or walking we should pay atten­
tion to the quality and not the quantity. If we practice only for
the quantity, then we aren't very different from Mrs. Nguyen. I
think she learned her lesson. I think she did better after that.


I"



  5
 WORKING FOR PEACE
A FTE R THE VI ETNAM WAR , many people wrote to u s in Plum
Village . We received hundreds of letters each week from the
 refugee camps in Singapore, Malaysia, Indonesia, Thailand, and
 the Philippines . It was very painful to read them, but we had to
be in contact. We tried our best to help, but the suffering was
enormous, and sometimes we were discouraged. It is said that
half the boat people fleeing Vietnam died in the ocean; only half
arrived at the shores of Southeast Asia.
    There were many young girls, boat people, who were raped by
sea pirates. Even though the United Nations and many coun­
tries tried to help the government of Thailand prevent that kind
of piracy, sea pirates continued to inflict much suffering on the
refugees . One day, we received a letter telling us about a young
girl on a small boat who was raped by a Thai pirate.
    She was only twelve, and she jumped into the ocean and
drowned herself.
   When you first learn of something like that, you get angly at
the pirate. You naturally take the side of the girl. As you look
more deeply you will see it differently. I f you take the side of the
little girl, then it is easy. You only have to take a gun and shoot
the pirate. But we can't do that. In my meditation, I saw that if
I had been born in the village of the pirate and raised in the same


66 I BEING PEACE
conditions as he was, I would now be the pirate. There is a great
likelihood that I would have become a pirate. I can't condemn
myself so easily. In my meditation, I saw that many babies are
born along the Gulf of Siam, hundreds every day, and if we edu­
cators, social workers , politicians, and others do not do some­
thing about the situation, in twenty-five years a number of them
will become sea pirates. That is certain. If you or I were born
today in those fishing villages, we might become sea pirates in
twenty-five years. If you take a gun and shoot the pirate, you
shoot all of us, because all of us are to some extent responsible
for this state of affairs .
   After a long meditation, I wrote this poem . In it, there are
three people: the twelve-year-old girl, the pirate, and me. Can
we look at each other and recognize ourselves in each other?
The title of the poem is "Please Call Me By My True Names,"
because I have so many names. When I hear one of these names,
I have to say, "Ye s . "
      P L E A S E C A L L M E B y M y TR U E N A M E S
      Do not say that I'll depart tomorrow­
      even today I am still arriving.
      Look deeply: every second I am arriving
      to be a bud on a Spring branch,
      to be a tiny bird, with still-fragile wings,
      learning to sing in my new nest,
      to be a caterpillar in the heart of a flower,
      to be a jewel hiding itself in a stone.


                                       WORKING FOR PEACE1 67
 I still arrive, in order to laugh and to cry,
 to fear and to hope,
the rhythm of my heart is the birth and death
of all that are alive.
I am a mayfly metamorphosing
on the surface of the river.
And I am the bird which, when Spring comes,
arrives in time to eat the mayfly.
I am a frog swimming happily
in the clear water of a pond .
And I am the grass-snake
that silently feeds itself on the frog.
I am the child in Uganda, all skin and bones,
my legs as thin as bamboo sticks.
And I am the arms merchant,
selling deadly weapons to Uganda.
I am the twelve-year-old girl,
refugee on a small boat,
who throws herself into the ocean
after being raped by a sea pirate.
And I am the pirate,
my heart not yet capable
of seeing and loving.
I am a member of the politburo,
with plenty of power in my hands.


68 / BEING PEACE
      And I am the man who has to pay his
      "debt of blood" to my people
      dying slowly in a forced labor camp.
      My joy is like Spring, so warm
      it makes flowers bloom all over the Earth.
      My pain is like a river of tears,
      so vast it fills the four oceans.
      Please call me by my true names,
      so I can hear all my cries and laughter at once,
      so I can see that my joy and pain are one.
      Please call me by my true names,
      so I can wake up
      and the door of my heart can be left open,
      the door of compassion.
There is a Zen story about a man riding a horse that is gallop­
ing very quickly. Another man, standing alongside the road,
yells at him, "Where are you going?" and the man on the horse
yells back, "I don't know. Ask the hors e . " I think that is our sit­
uation. We are riding many horses that we cannot control. The
proliferation of armaments , for instance, is a horse. We h ave
tried our best, but we cannot control these horses. Our lives are
so busy.
   In Buddhism, the most important precept of all is to live in
awareness, to lmow what is going on. To lmow what is going on,


                                          WORKING FOR PEACE /69
 not only here, but there. For instance, when you eat a piece of
bread, you may choose to be aware that our farmers, in growing
 the wheat, use chemical poisons a little too much. Eating the
 bread, we are somehow co-responsible for the destruction of our
 environment. We can increase our awareness of the fact that
40,000 children die each day from hunger. In order to produce a
piece of meat or a bottle of liquor, we have to use a lot of grain.
Eating a bowl of rice may be reconciling more with the suffering
of the world than eating a piece of meat. An authority on eco­
nomics who lives in France told me that if only the people in
Western c ountries would reduce their eating of meat and drink­
ing of alcohol by 50 percent, that would be enough to change the
 situation of the world. Only 50 percent les s .
    Every day w e d o things, we are things, that have t o d o with
peace. If we are aware of our lifestyle, our way of consuming, of
looking at things, we will know how to make peace right in the
moment we are alive, the present moment. When we pick up the
Sunday newspaper, for instance, we may be aware that it is a very
heavy edition, maybe three or four pounds . To print such a paper,
a whole forest may be needed. When we pick up the paper, we
should be aware . If we are very aware, we can do something to
change the course of things.
In my temple, I was the first monk to ride a bicycle. At that time,
there were no gathas to recite while riding on a bicycle. We have
to practice intelligently, to keep the practice up to date, so
recently I wrote a gatha you can use before you start your car. I
hope you will find it helpful:


70 / BEING PEACE
       Before starting the car,
       I know where I am going.
      The car and I are one.
       If the car goes fast, I go fast.
   Sometimes we don't really need to use the car, but because we
want to get away from ourselves, we go down and start the car. If
we recite the gatha, "Before starting the car, I know where I am
going," it can be like a flashlight-we may see that we don't need
to go anywhere. An)T\vhere we go, we will have our self with us;
we cannot escape ourselves. Sometimes it is better to turn the
engine off and go out for a walking meditation. It may be more
pleasant to do that.
   It is said that in the last few years, two million square miles of
forest land have been destroyed by acid rain, and that is partly
because of our cars. "Before starting the car, I know where I am
going," is a very deep question. "\i\lhere shall I go? To my own
destruction?" If the trees die, humans are going to die also. If
trees and animals are not alive, how can we be alive?
   "The car and I are one ." We have the impression that we are
the boss, and the car is only an instrument, but that is not true.
With the car, we become something different. \i\lith a gun, we
become very dangerous. \i\lith a flute, we become pleasant. With
50,000 atomic bombs, humankind has become the most danger­
ous species on Earth. \i\le were never so dangerous as we are now.
We should be aware . The most basic precept of all is to be aware
of what we do, what we are, each minute . Every other precept
will follow from that.


                                          WORKING FOR PEACE / 7 1
 We have to look deeply at things in order to see. When a swim­
 mer enjoys the clear water of the river, he or she should also be
 able to be the river. One day I was having lunch at Boston Uni­
versity with some friends, and I looked down at the Charles
 River. I had been away from home for quite a long time, and see­
ing the river, I found it very beautiful. So I left my friends and
went down to wash my face and dip my feet in the water, as we
 used to do in our country. When I returned, a professor said,
"That's a very dangerous thing to do. Did you rinse your mouth
in the river?" When I told him, "Yes," he said, "You should see a
doctor and get a shot."
   I was shocked. I didn't lmow that the rivers here are so pol·
luted. You may call them dead rivers. In our country the rivers get
very muddy sometimes, but not with that kind of dirt. Someone
told me that there are so many chemicals in the Rhine River in
Germany that it is possible to develop photographs in it. We can
be good swimmers, but can we be a river and experience the fears
and hopes of a river? If we cannot, then we do not have the
chance for peace. If all the rivers are dead, then the joy of swim­
ming in the river will no longer exist.
   If you are a mountain climber or someone who enjoys the
countryside, or the green forest, you know that the forests are our
lungs outside of our bodies. Yet we have been acting in a way that
has allowed two million square miles of forest land to be
destroyed by acid rain. We are imprisoned in our small selves,
thinking only of the comfortable conditions for this small self,
while we destroy our large self. One day I s uddenly saw that the
sun is my heart, my heart outside of this body. If my body's heart


72 / BEING PEACE
ceases to function I cannot survive; but if the sun, my other
heart, ceases to function, I will also die immediately. \Ve should
be able to be our true self. That means we should be able to be
the river, we should be able to be the forest, we should be able to
be a citizen of any country in the world. We must do this to
understand, and to have hope for the future. That is the non­
dualistic way of seeing.
During the war in Vietnam, we young Buddhists organized our­
selves to help victims of the war rebuild villages that had been
destroyed by the bombs. M any of us died during service, not
only because of the bombs and the bullets, but because of the
people who suspected us of being on the other side. We were
able to understand the suffering of both sides, the communists
and the anti-communists . We tried to be open to both, to under­
stand this side and to understand that side, to be one with them.
That is why we did not take a side, even though the whole world
took sides. We tried to tell people our perception of the situa­
tion: that we wanted to stop the fighting. But the bombs were so
loud. Sometimes we had to burn ourselves alive to get the mes­
sage across, but even then the world couldn't hear us. They
thought it was a political action. They didn't know that it was a
purely human action to be heard, to be understood. We didn't
want a victory, we wanted reconciliation. Working to help peo­
ple in a circumstance like that is very dangerous, and many of
my friends were killed. The communists killed us because they
suspected that we were working with the Americans , and the
anti-communists killed us because they thought that we were


                                              WORKING FOR PEACE / 73
with the communists . But we didn't give up and we didn't take
sides.
   The situation of the world is still like this. People identify com­
pletely with one side, one ideology. To understand the suffering
and the fear of a citizen of another country, we have to become
one with him. To do so is dangerous-we will be suspected by
both sides. But if we don't do it, if we align ourselves with one
side or the other, we will lose our chance to work for peace. Rec­
onciliation is to understand both sides, to go to one side and
describe the suffering being endured by the other side, and then
to go to the other side and describe the suffering being endured
by the first side. Doing only that will be a great help for peace.
    During a retreat at the Providence Zen Center, I asked some­
one to express himself as a swimmer in a river, and then after
fifteen minutes of breathing, to express himself as the river. H e
had t o become t h e river t o b e able t o express himself in the lan­
guage and feelings of the river. After that a woman who had been
in the Soviet Union was asked to express herself as an American,
and, after some breathing and meditation, as a Soviet citizen
with all her fears and her hope for peace. She did it wonderfully.
These are exercises of meditation related to nonduality.
   The young Buddhist workers in Vietnam tried to do this kind
of meditation. M any of them died during service . I wrote a poem
for my young brothers and sisters on how to die nonviolently,
without hatred. I t is called "Recommendation. "


74 1 BEING PEACE
      RECOMMENDATION
      Promise me,
      promise me this day,
      promise me now,
      while the sun is overhead
      exactly at the zenith,
      promise me:
      Even as they
      strike you down
      with a mountain of hatred and violence;
      even as they step on you and crush you
      like a worm,
      even as they dismember and disembowel you,
      remember, brother,
      remember:
      man is not our enemy.
      The only thing worthy of you is compassion­
      invincible, limitless, unconditional.
      Hatred will never let you face
      the beast in man .
      One day, when you face this beast alone,
      with your courage intact, your eyes kind,
      untroubled
      (even as no one sees them),
      out of your smile


                                         WORKING FOR PEACE / 75
       will bloom a flower.
       And those who love you
       will behold you
       across ten thousand worlds of birth and dying.
       Alone again,
       I will go on with bent head,
       lmowing that love has become eternal.
       On the long, rough road,
       the sun and the moon
       will continue to shine.
   To practice meditation is to be aware of the existence of s uf­
fering. The first Dharma talk that the Buddha gave was about
suffering, and the way out of suffering. In South Africa under
Apartheid, the black people suffered enormously. The white
people also suffered. If we take one side, we can't fulfill our task
of reconciliation in order to bring about peace.
   Are there people who can be in touch with both I sraelis and
Palestinians, Pakistanis and Indians, black and white? Without
them, the situation gets worse. There must be people who can
get in touch with both sides, understanding the suffering of
each, and telling each side about the other. We need people who
can help bring mediation and reconciliation to nations in con­
flict. Can Americans be more than Americans? Can we be peo­
ple who understand deeply the suffering of both sides? Can we
bring the message of reconciliation?


76 / BEING PEACE
You may not be aware that your country has been manufacturing
a lot of conventional weapons to sell to other countries for their
people to kill each other. You know very well that children and
adults in these countries need food more than they need these
deadly weapons . Yet no one has the time to organize a national
debate to look at the problem of manufacturing and selling these
deadly things. Everyone is too busy. Conventional weapons have
caused much killing in the last fifty years . If we only think of
the nuclear bombs that may explode in the future and do not
pay attention to the bombs that are exploding in the present
moment, we commit some kind of error. I believe former Presi­
dent Reagan said that the U . S . has to continue to make conven­
tional weapons to sell because if you don't, someone else will and
the U . S . will lose its interest. This statement is off course; it's just
an excuse, but there are real factors that push the preSident and
push the whole nation to continue to manufacture conventional
weapons to sell. For instance, many people will lose their jobs if
they stop. What kind of work will help these people if the
weapons industry stops?
   Not manyAmericans are aware that these weapons are killing
people every day. The Congress has not debated this issue seri­
ously. We haven't taken the time to see this situation clearly, so
we haven't been able to change our government's policy. We
aren't strong enough to pressure the government. The foreign
policy of a government is largely dictated by its people and their
way of life. We have a large responsibility as citizens . We think
that the government is free to make policy, but that freedom
depends on our daily life. If we make it possible for them to
change policies, they will do it. Now it isn't yet possible. Maybe
you think that if you get into government and obtain power, you


                                           WORKING FOR PEACE / 77
 can do anything you want, but that isn't true. If you become pres­
 ident, you will be confronted by this hard fact . You will probably
 do just the same thing, a little better or a little worse.
    Therefore we have to see the real truth, the real situation. Our
 daily lives, the way we drink, what we eat, have to do with the
world's political situation. Meditation is to see deeply into things,
 to see how we can change, how we can transform our situation.
To transform our situation is also to transform our minds. To
transform our minds is also to transform our situation, because
 the situation is mind, and mind is situation. Awakening is impor­
tant. The nature of the bombs, the nature of injustice, the nature
of the weapons, and the nature of our own being are the same.
This is the real meaning of engaged Buddhism.
During the last 2, 500 years in Buddhist monasteries, a system of
seven practices of reconciliation has evolved. Although these
techniques were formulated to settle disputes within the circle
of monks, I think they might also be of use in our households and
in our society.
The first practice is Face-to-Face Sitting. In a convocation of the
whole Sangha, everyone sits together mindfully, breathing and
smiling, with the willingness to help, and not with the willing­
ness to fight. This is basic. The two conflicting monks are pres­
ent, and they know that everyone in the community expects
them to make peace . Even before anything is said, the atmos­
phere of peace is already present. People refrain from listening
to stories outside of the assembly, spreading news about this


78 / BEING PEACE
monk or other monks, commenting on the behavior of this monk
or the other monks. That would not help. Everything must be
said in public, in the community. So the two monks are sitting
facing each other, breathing and, how hard, smiling.
The second practice is Remembrance. Both monks try to re­
member the whole history of the conflict, every detail having to
do with the conflict, while the whole assembly just sits patiently
and listens . One monk might say, "I remember that that day it
was rainy, and I went to the kitchen and you were there . . . ," con­
tinuing with as much he can recall. This is quite important,
because the monks are tlying to mend the things of the past. The
principle of Sangha life is to be aware of what is going on every
day. If you are not aware of what is going on, one day things will
explode, and it will be too late. If the community is sitting in
assembly and there are two monks confronting each other,
already the conflict has exploded into the open . To sit and try to
recall details from the past is the only thing to do now, as far as
the past is concerned.
   Suppose a woman and a man get married and then live a neg­
lectful life, not knowing what is really going on subconsciously.
Their feelings and their perceptions are creating a dangerous
situation. S ometimes things occur beneath the surface which
will eventually explode, and by then it is too late to deal with, so
the only recourse is divorce or fighting or even killing each other.
To meditate is to be aware of what is going on in yourself, your
feelings, your body, your perceptions, your family. This is very
important for any kind of life. The second technique is to recall,
and the more details which the community has, the easier it is
to help .


                                         WORKING FOR PEACE / 79
 The third principle is Non-stubbornness. Everyone in the com­
munity expects the two monks not to be stubborn, to try their
 best for reconciliation. The outcome is not important. The fact
 that each monk is doing his best to show his willingness for rec­
 onciliation and understanding is most important. When you do
your best, trying to be �our best in understanding and accept­
ing, you don't have to worry about the outcome. You do your
best, and that is enough. The other person will do his or her
 best. The atmosphere of the assembly is crucial. Because
everyone has high expectations for the two monks, they know
they must act well or they will not be recognized as brothers .
The fourth practice is Covering Mud with S traw. You know when
you walk in the countryside after a rain, it is very muddy. If you
have straw to spread over the mud, you can walk safely. One
respected senior monk is appointed to represent each side of the
conflict. These two monks then address the assembly, trying to
say something to de-escalate the feeling in the concerned peo­
ple. In a Buddhist Sangha, people respect the high monks. We
call them ancestral teachers. They don't have to say very much;
whatever they say is taken very seriously by the rest of the com­
munity. One says something concerning this monk, and what he
says will cause the other monk to understand better and de­
escalate his feeling, his anger or his resistance. Then the o ther
high monk says something to protect the other monk, saying it
in a way that the first monk feels better. By doing so, they dissi­
pate the hard feelings in the hearts of the two monks and help
them to accept the verdict proposed by the community. Putting
straw on mud- the mud is the dispute, and the straw is the lov­
ing kindness of the Dharma.


80 / BEING PEACE
The fifth stage is Voluntary Confession. Each monk reveals his
own shortcomings, without waiting for others to say them. If the
others say them, you feel differently. If you yourself say them, it
is wonderful. First you reveal a minor weakness . You may have a
big weakness, but you tell only of some minor transgression.
(There is an art in all that . ) As you make a confession, you might
say, "On that day, I was not very mindful. I said such and such a
thing. That is horrible. I am sorry." Even though it is a velY minor
confession, it helps the other person feel better. It encourages
him to confess something of the same magnitude. (Imagine the
Soviet Union and the United States trying to slowly de-escalate
the small things . )
   This atmosphere is encouraging. Everyone is supportive, ex­
pecting that de-escalation will be realized. The Buddha nature
in each monk has the opportunity to come out, and the pressure
on each monk from his anger or resentment will lighten. In this
kind of atmosphere, the capacity of mutual understanding and
acceptance will be born. Then the senior monks remind the
feuding monks, " First of all you are part of the community. The
well-being of the community is most important. Don't think only
of your own feeling. Think of the well-being of the community."
And then each monk will be ready to make a sacrifice, and get
ready to accept the verdict or decision made by the community.
The sixth and seventh practices are Decision by Consensus and
Accepting the Verdict. It is agreed in advance that the two monks
will accept whatever verdict is pronounced by the whole assem­
bly, or they will have to leave the community. So, after exploring
evelY detail of the conflict, after realizing the maximum of recon­
ciliation, a committee presents a verdict. It is announced three


                                           WORKING F O R PEACE / 81
 times. The head of the community reads the decision in this way:
"After meditation, after exploration, after discussion, after all
efforts have been made, it is suggested that this monk will do so
and so, that monk will do so and so, this should be repaired in this
way, that should be repaired in that way. Does the assembly of
monks accept this verdict?" If the community remains silent,
that means, "Okay." Then he repeats exactly the same words,
"Does the noble assembly accept this verdict?" And then,
silence. And a third time, "Does the community accept this ver­
dict?" After a third time of silence, he pronounces, 'The noble
community of monks and nuns has accepted the verdict. Please,
both sides carry out the decision." This is the end of the session.
There may be many sessions to solve one case. If one of the
monks rebels against the verdict, his voice is of no weight,
because he has already agreed to obey any verdict made by the
assembly.
These seven methods of settling disputes have been adopted by
Buddhist monks and nuns in India, China, Vietnam, Japan,
Korea, and many other countries for more than 2 , 500 years. I
think we can learn something from them to apply in our own
households and society.
There is a lot of anger, frustration, and misunderstanding in the
peace movement. The peace movement can write very good
protest letters, but they are not yet able to write a love letter. We
need to learn to write a letter to the C ongress or to the president
of the United States that they will want to read, and not just


82 / BEING PEACE
throw away. The way you speak, the kind of understanding, the
kind of language you use should not turn people off. The presi­
dent is a person like any of us.
   Can the peace movement talk in loving speech, showing the
way for peace? I think that will depend on whether the people in
the peace movement can be peace . Because without being
peace, we cannot do anything for peace. If we cannot smile, we
cannot help other people to smile. If we are not peaceful, then
we c annot contribute to the peace movement.
   I hope we can bring a new dimension to the peace movement.
The peace movement is filled with anger and hatred. It cannot
fulfill the path we expect from them. A fresh way of being peace,
of doing peace is needed. That is why it is so important for us to
practice meditation, to acquire the capacity to look, to see, and
to understand. It would be wonderful if we could bring to the
peace movement our contribution, our way of looking at things,
that will diminish aggression and hatred . Peace work means, first
of all , being peace. Meditation is meditation for all of us. We rely
on each other. Our children are relying on us in order for them
to have a future.






  6
 INTERBEING
 I B ELIEVE that the encounter between Buddhism and the West
will bring about something very exciting, very important. There
are important values in Western society, such as the scientific
way of looking at things, the spirit of free inquiry, and democ­
racy. If there is an encounter between Buddhism and these val­
ues, humankind will have something very new, velY exciting.
Let us look at some examples: Printing was invented in China
and movable metal type was invented in Korea, but when the
West began printing, it became a very important means for com­
munication. Gunpowder was discovered by the C hinese, but
when i t came to be manufactured by Westerners, it changed the
face of the Earth. And the tea that was discovered in Asia, when
brought to the West, has become tea bags . When combined
with the Western way of doing things, the Buddhist principle of
seeing and acting nondualistically will totally change our way of
life. The role of American Buddhists in bringing Buddhism into
the encounter with Western civilization is very important for all
of us.
    Buddhism is not one. The teaching of Buddhism is many.
When Buddhism enters one country, that country always
acquires a new form of Buddhism. The first time I visited Bud­
dhist communities in the United States I asked a friend, "Please


86 ! BEING PEACE
show me your Buddha, your American Buddha." The question
surprised my friend , because he thought that the Buddha is uni­
versal. In fact, the Chinese have a Chinese Buddha, Tibetans
have a Tibetan Buddha, and also the teaching is different. The
teaching of Buddhism in this country is different from other
countries. Buddhism, in order to be Buddhism, must be suit­
able, appropriate to the psychology and the culture of the soci­
ety that it serves.
   My question was a very simple question . "Where is your
bodhisattva? Show me an American bodhisattva. " My friend was
not capable of doing that. "Show me an American monk, an
American nun, or an American Buddhist Center." All these
things are not apparent yet. I think we can learn from other Bud­
dhist traditions, but you have to create your own Buddhism. I
believe that out of deep practice you "viII have your own Dud­
dhism very soon.
I would like to present to you a form of Buddhism that may be
accepted here in the \Vest. In the past twenty years we have been
experimenting with this form of Buddhism, and it seems that it
may be suitable for our modern society. It is called the Tiep Hien
Order, the Order of "Interbeing."
   The Tiep Hien Order was founded in Vietnam during the war.
It derives from the Zen School of Lin Chi, and is the forty-sec­
ond generation of this school. It is a form of engaged Buddhism.
Engaged Buddhism is Buddhism in daily life, in society, and not
just in a retreat center. 'Tiep" and "hien" are Vietnamese words
of Chinese origin. I would like to explain the meaning of these


                                                    INTERBEING / 87
 words, because understanding them helps in understanding the
 spirit of this order.
    "Tiep" means "to be in touch." The notion of engaged Bud­
 dhism already appears in the word "tiep . " First of all, to be in
 touch with oneself. In modern society most of us don't want to
be in touch with ourselves; we want to be in touch with other
 things like religion, sports, polities, a book-we want to forget
 ourselves. Anytime we have leisure, we want to invite something
else to enter us, opening ourselves to the television and telling
the television to come and colonize us. So first of all, "in touch"
means in touch with oneself in order to find out the source of
wisdom, understanding, and compassion in each of us. Being in
touch with oneself is the meaning of meditation, to be aware of
what is going on in your body, in your feelings, in your mind. That
is the first meaning of "tiep ."
    "Tiep" also means to be in touch with Buddhas and bodhi­
sattvas, the enlightened people in whom full understanding and
compassion are tangible and effective. Being in touch with one­
self means being in touch with this source of wisdom and com­
passion . You know that children understand that the Buddha is
in themselves. One young boy claimed to be a Buddha on the
first day of the retreat in Ojai, California. I told him that this is
partly true, because sometimes he is Buddha, but sometimes he
is not; it depends on his degree of being awake .
    The second p art of the meaning of "tiep" is "to continue , " to
make something more long-lasting. It means that the career of
understanding and compassion started by B u ddhas and
b o dhisattvas should be continued. This is possible only if we
get in touch with our true self, which i s like digging deep into
the soil until we reach a hidden source of fresh water, and then


88 / B EING PEACE
the well is filled. When we are in touch with our true mind,
the s ource o f understanding and compassion will spring out.
This is the basis of everything. Being in touch with our true
mind is necessary for the continuation of the career started by
the Buddhas and bodhisattvas.
   "Hien" means "the present time." We have to be in the pres­
ent time, because only the present is real, only in the present
moment can we be alive. We do not practice for the sake of the
future, to be reborn in a paradise, but to be peace, to be compas­
sion, to be joy right now. "Hien" also means "to make real, to man­
ifest, realization." Love and understanding are not only concepts
and words. They must be real things, realized, in oneself and in
society. That is the meaning of the v,,lord "hien ."
   Itis difficult to find English or French words which convey the
same meaning as Tiep Hien. There is a term from the Avatam­
saka Sutra, "interbeing," that conveys the spirit, so we have trans­
lated Tiep Hien as interbeing. In the sutra it is a compound term
which means "mutual" and "to be." Interbeing is a new word in
English, and I hope it will be accepted. We have talked about the
many in the one, and the one containing the many. In one sheet
of paper, we see everything else, the cloud, the forest, the logger.
I am, therefore you arc. You are, therefore I am. That is the mean­
ing of the word "interbeing." \Ve interare.
   In the Order of I nterbeing, there are two communities . The
core community consists of lay and monastic men and women
who have taken the vow to observe the Fourteen Mindfulness
Trainings of the Order. Before being ordained as a brother or a
sister of the Order of Interbeing, one should practice at least
one year in this way. Upon ordination, the person has to organ­
ize a community around himself or herself in order to continue


                                                     INTERBEING / 89
the practice. That community is called the extended commu­
ni ty. This means all those who practice exactly the same way,
but have not taken the vow, have not been ordained into the core
community.
    The laypeople who are ordained into the core community do
not have any special sign at all . They don't shave their heads, they
don't have a special robe, except sometimes they wear a brown
jacket. What makes them different is that they observe a num­
ber of rules, one of which is to practice at least sixty days of
retreat, days of mindfulness, each year, whether consecutively
or divided into several periods. If they practice every Sunday, for
instance, they will have fifty-two already. The people in the
extended community can do that, or more, even if they don't
want to be ordained. In the core community people can choose
to observe celibacy or lead a family life.
   At least once every two weeks, members and friends come
together and recite the Fourteen Mindfulness Trainings . They
begin with the three refuges and the two promises for children.
These two promises envelop all the mindfulness trainings of the
adults . The first promise is:
       " I vow to develop my compassion in order to love and pro­
       tect the life of people, animals, plants , and minerals ."
The second promise is:
       "I vow to develop understanding in order to be able to love
       and to live in harmony with people, animals, plants, and
       minerals . "


90 / BEING PEACE
So the two promises are compassion, or love, and understand­
ing. They are the essence of the Buddha's teaching. After the
children recite the three refuges and these two promises, they
can go outside and play; and the adults recite their Fourteen
Mindfulness Trainings .
   Until recently, I have used the term "precepts" instead of
"mindfulness trainings. " But many Western friends told me that
the word "precepts" evokes in them a strong feeling of good and
evil, that if they "break" a precept, they feel they have completely
failed. Precepts are different from "commandments ." They are
the insights born from directly observing suffering and the
causes of suffering. They are the most concrete expression of the
practice of mindfulness . That is why it is appropriate and help­
ful to describe them as "mindfulness trainings . "
   Precepts usually begin with admonitions concerning the
body, such as "not to kill." The Mindfulness Trainings of the
Order of Interbeing are the opposite-the ones concerning the
mind come first. According to the teachings of the Buddha, the
mind is the root of everything else. These then are the M indful­
ness Trainings of the Order of Interbeing:
The First Mindfulness Training
Aware of the suffering created by fanaticism and intolerance,
we are determined not to be idolatrous about or bound to any
doctrine, theory, or ideology, even Buddhist ones. Buddhist
teachings are guiding means to help us learn to look deeply
and to develop our understanding and compassion. They are
not doctrines to fight, kill, or die for.


                                                     INTERBEING / 9 1
This mindfulness training is the roar of the lion. I t s spirit i s char­
acteristic of Buddhism. It is often said that the Buddha's teach­
ing is only a raft to help you cross the river, a finger pointing to
the moon. Don't mistake the finger for the moon. The raft is not
the shore. If we cling to the raft, if we cling to the finger, we miss
everything. We cannot, in the name of the finger or the raft, kill
each other. Human life is more precious than any ideology or
doctrine.
    The Order of Interbeing was born in Vietnam during the war,
which was a conflict between two world ideologies . In the name
of ideologies and doctrines, people kill and are killed. If you have
a gun, you can shoot one, two, three, five people; but if you have
an ideology and stick to it, thinking it is the absolute truth, you
can kill millions. This mindfulness training includes the admo­
nition not to kill in its deepest sense. Humankind suffers very
much from attachment to views . "If you don't follow this teach­
ing, I will cut off your head." In the name of the truth, we kill
each other. The world is stuck in that situation. There are peo­
ple who still think that Marxism is the highest product of the
human mind, that nothing can compare with it. Others think it
is crazy, and that we have to destroy those people. We are caught
in this situation.
   One of the most basic teachings of the Buddha is that life is
precious. Peace can only be achieved when we are free from
fanaticism. The more you practice this mindfulness training, the
deeper you will go into reality and understanding the teaching of
the Buddha.


92 / BEING PEACE
The Second Mindfulness Training
Aware of the suffering created by attachment to views and
wrong perceptions, we are determined to avoid being narrow­
minded and bound to present views. We shall learn and prac­
tice nonattachment from views in order to be open to others'
insights and experiences. We are aware that the knowledge
we presently possess is not changeless, absolute truth. Truth
is found in life, and we will observe life within and around us
in every moment, ready to learn throughout our lives.
This mindfulness training arises from the first one. Remember
the young father who refused to open the door to his own son,
thinking the boy was already dead. The Buddha said, "If you cling
to something as absolute truth and are caught in it, when truth
comes in person and knocks on your door, you will refuse to let
it in." A scientist with an open mind, who can question the pres­
ent knowledge of science, will have more of a chance of discov­
ering a higher truth. A Buddhist in her quest for higher
understanding, also has to question her present views concern­
ing reality. The technique of understanding is to overcome views
and knowledge. The way of nonattachment from views is the
basic teaching of Buddhism concerning understanding.
The Third Mindfulness Training
Aware of the suffering brought about when we impose our
views on others, we are committed not to force others, even
our children, by any means whatsoever-such as authority,


                                                      INTERBEING / 93
 threat, money, propaganda, or indoctrination-to adopt our
 views. We will respect the right of others to be different and
 to choose what to believe and how to decide. We will, how­
 ever, help others renounce fanaticism and narrowness
 through compassionate dialogue.
This also springs from the First Mindfulness Training. It is the
spirit of free inquiry. I think \l\1esterners can accept this, because
you understand it. If you can find a way to organize it globally, it
will be a happy event for the world.
The Fourth Mindfulness Training
Aware that looking deeply at the nature of suffering can help
us develop compassion and find ways out of suffering, we are
determined not to avoid or close our eyes before suffering.
We are committed to finding ways, including personal con­
tact, images, and sounds, to be with those who suffer, so we
can understand their situation deeply and help them trans­
form their suffering into compassion, peace, and joy.
The first Dharma talk given by the Buddha was on the Four
Noble Truths . The first truth is the existence of suffering. Con­
tact with and awareness of suffering is needed. If we don't
encounter pain, ills, we won't look for the causes of pain and ills
to find a remedy, a way out of the situation.
   America is somehow a closed society. Americans are not velY
aware of what is going on outside ofAmerica. Life here is so busy
that even if you watch television and read the newspaper, and


94 / BEING PEACE
the images from outside flash by, there is no real contact. I hope
you will find some way to nourish the awareness of the existence
of suffering in the world. Of course, inside America there is also
suffering, and it is important to stay in touch with that. But much
of the suffering in the West is unnecessary and can vanish when
we see the real suffering of other people. Sometimes we suffer
because of some psychological fact. We cannot get out of our self,
and so we suffer. If we get in touch with the suffering in the world
and are moved by that suffering, we may come forward to help the
people who are suffering, and our own suffering may just vanish.
The Fifth Mindfulness Training
Aware that true happiness is rooted in peace, solidity, free­
dom, and compassion, and not in wealth or fame, we are
determined not to take as the aim of our life fame, profit,
wealth, or sensual pleasure, nor to accumulate wealth while
millions are hungry and dying. We are committed to living
simply and sharing our time, energy, and material resources
with those in need. We will practice mindful consuming, not
using alcohol, drugs, or any other products that bring toxins
into our own and the collective body and consciousness.
The Eight Realizations of Great Beings Sutra says, "The human
mind is always searching for possessions, and never feels ful­
filled. Bodhisattvas move in the opposite direction and follow
the principle of self-sufficiency. They live a simple life in order
to practice the way, and consider the realization of perfect under­
standing as their only career." In the context of our modern soci-


                                                    INTERBEING / 9 5
 ety, simple living also means to remain as free as possible from
 the destructive social and economic machine, and to avoid
 stress, depression, high blood pressure, and other modern dis­
 eases . We should make every effort to avoid the pressures and
 anxieties that fill most modern lives. The only way out is to con­
 sume less. Once we are able to live simply and happily, we are
 better able to help others.
 The Sixth M in dfulness Training
 Aware that anger blocks communication and creates suffer­
 ing, we are determined to take care o f the e nergy o f anger
 when it arises and to recognize and transform the seeds of
 anger that lie deep in our consciousne s s . When anger comes
 up, we are determined not to do or s ay anything, but to prac­
tice mindful breathing or mindful walking a n d acknowledge,
 embrace, and look deeply into our anger. We will learn to l o o k
with t h e eyes o f compassion at t h o s e w e think a r e t h e c a u s e
 of o u r anger.
We have to be aware of irritation or anger as it arises, and try to
understand it. Once we understand, we are better able to forgive
 and love. Meditation on compassion means meditation on
understanding. If we do not understand, we cannot love.
    "Learn to look at other beings with the eyes of compassion" is
a quote from the Lotus Sutra chapter on Avalokiteshvara. You
might like to write this down and put it in your sitting room. The
original Chinese is only five words: "compassionate eyes looking
living beings." The first time I recited the Lotus Sutra, when I


96 / BEING PEACE
came to these five words, I was silenced. I knew that these five
words are enough to guide my whole life.
The Seventh Mindfulness Training
Aware that life is available only in the present moment and
that it is possible to live happily in the here and now, we are
committed to training ourselves to live deeply each moment
of daily life: We will try not to lose ourselves in dispersion or
be carried away by regrets about the past, worries about the
future, or craving, anger, or jealousy in the present. We will
practice mindful breathing to come back to what is happen­
ing in the present moment. We are determined to learn the
art of mindful living by touching the wondrous, refreshing,
and healing elements that are inside and around us, and by
nourishing seeds of joy, peace, love, and understanding in
ourselves, thus facilitating the work of transformation and
healing in our consciousness.
This mindfulness training is in the middle. It is the heart of the
Fourteen Mindfulness Trainings, the most important one: to live
in awareness. Without this training, without mindfulness, the
other mindfulness trainings cannot be observed completely. It is
like a carrying pole. In Asia they used to carry things with a pole,
and put the middle of the pole on their shoulders. This training
is like the middle of the pole that you cany on your shoulders.


                                                       INTERBEING / 97
The Eighth Mindfulness Training
Aware that the lack of communication always brings separa­
tion and suffering, we are committed to training ourselves in
the practice of compassionate listening and loving speech.
We will learn to listen deeply without judging or reacting and
refrain from uttering words that can create discord or cause
the community to break. We will make every effort to keep
communications open and to reconcile and resolve all con­
flicts, however small.
We now come to the second set of mindfulness trainings, con­
cerning speech . The first seven trainings deal with mind, then
two with speech, and five with body. This mindfulness training
is about reconciliation, the effort to make peace, not only in your
family, but in society as well. In order to help reconcile a conflict,
we have to be in touch with both sides. We must transcend the
conflict; if we are still in the conflict, it is difficult to reconcile.
We have to have a nondualistic viewpoint in order to listen to
both sides and understand. The world needs people like this for
the work of reconciliation, people with the capacity of under­
standing and compassion.
The Ninth Mindfulness Training
Aware that words can create suffering or happiness, we are
committed to learning to speak truthfully and constructively,
using only words that inspire hope and confidence. We are
determined not to say untruthful things for the sake of per-


9 8 / BEING PEACE
sonal interest or to impress people, nor to utter words that
might cause division or hatred. We will not spread news that
we do not know to be certain nor criticize or condemn things
of which we are not sure. We will do our best to speak out
about situations of injustice, even when doing so may
threaten our safety.
The words we speak can create love, trust, and happiness around
us, or create a hel l . VIe should be careful about what we say. If
we tend to talk too much, \Ne should become aware of it and learn
to speak less. We must become aware of our speech and the
results of our speaking. There is a gatha that can be recited
before picking up the telephone:
       \Vords can travel across thousands of miles.
       May my words create mutual understanding
       and love.
       May they be as beautiful as gems,
       as lovely as flowers .
   We should speak constructively. In our speech we can try not
to cause misunderstanding, hatred, or jealousy, but rather to
increase understanding and mutual acceptance. This may even
help reduce our telephone bills . The Ninth Mindfulness Train­
ing also requires frankness and courage. How many of us are
brave enough to denounce injustice in a situation in which
speaking the truth might threaten our own safety?


                                                  INTERBEING / 99
 The Tenth Mindfulness Training
Aware that the essence and aim of a Sangha is the practice
 of understanding and compassion, we are determined not
 to use the Buddhist community for personal gain or profit
 or transform our community into a political instrument. A
 spiritual community should, however, take a clear stand
against oppression and injustice and should strive to
change the situation without engaging in partisan con­
flicts.
This does not mean that we must be silent about injustice. It just
means we should do it with awareness and not take sides. We
should speak the truth and not just weigh the political conse­
quences. If we take sides, we will lose our power to help medi­
ate the conflict.
   During one visit to America, I met with a group of people who
wanted to raise funds to help the government of Vietnam rebuild
the country. I asked whether they would also like to do something
for the boat people, and they said no. They thought that politi­
cally it is not good to talk about the boat people, because that
would discredit the government of Vietnam. In order to succeed
in one thing, they have to refrain from doing something that they
think is right.
The Eleventh Mindfulness Training
Aware that great violence and injustice have been done to our
environment and society, we are committed to not live with


roo / B E I N G PEACE
a vocation that is harmful to humans and nature. We will do
our best to select a livelihood that helps realize o u r ideal of
understanding and compassion. Aware of global economic,
political, and s ocial realities, we will behave responsibly as
consumers and a s citizens, not investing i n c o mp anies that
deprive o thers o f their c h ance to live.
This is an extremely hard training to observe. If you are lucky
enough to have a vocation that helps you realize your ideal of
compassion, you still have to understand more deeply. If I am a
teacher, I am very glad to have this job helping children. I am glad
that I am not a butcher who kills cows and pigs . Yet the son and
the daughter of the butcher come to my class, and I teach them.
They profit from my right livelihood. My son and daughter eat
the meat that the butcher prepares. Vie are linked together. I
cannot say that my livelihood is perfectly right . It cannot be.
Observing this mindfulness training includes finding ways to
realize a collective right livelihood.
   You may try to follow a vegetarian diet, to lessen the killing of
animals, but you cannot completely avoid the killing. \l\1hen you
drink a glass of water, you kill many tiny living beings . Even in
your dish of vegetables, there are quite a lot of them, boiled or
fried. I am aware that my vegetarian dish is not completely veg­
etarian, and I think that if my teacher, the Buddha, were here,
he could not avoid that either. The problem is whether we are
determined to go in the direction of compassion or not. If we are,
then can we reduce the suffering to a minimum? If I lose my
direction, I have to look for the North S tar, and I go to the north.
That does not mean I expect to arrive at the North S tar. I j ust
want to go in that direction.


                                                  INTERBEING /  10J
 The Twelfth Mindfulness Training
Aware that much suffering is caused by war and conflict, we
 are determined to cultivate nonviolence, understanding, and
 compassion in our daily lives, to promote peace education,
 mindful mediation, and reconciliation within families, com­
 munities, nations, and in the world. We are determined not
 to kill and not to let others kill . We will diligently practice
deep looking with our Sangha to discover better ways to pro­
 tect life and prevent war.
The defense budgets in Western countries are still enormous.
 Studies show that by stopping the arms race, we will have more
than enough money to erase poverty, hunger, illiteracy, and many
 diseases from the world. This mindfulness training applies not
only to humans, but to all living beings. As we have seen, no one
can observe this training to perfection; however, the essence is
to respect and protect life, to do our best to protect life. This
means not killing, and also not letting other people kill. It is
difficult. Those who tlY to observe this training have to be work­
ing for peace in order to have peace in themselves. Preventing
war is much better than protesting against the war. Protesting the
war is too late.
The Thirteenth Mindfulness Training
Aware of the suffering caused by exploitation, social injus­
tice, stealing, and oppression, we are committed to cultivat­
ing loving kindness and learning ways to work for the


1 02 / B E ING PEACE
well-being of people, animals, plants, and minerals. We will
practice generosity by s haring our time, e nergy, and material
res ources with those who are i n need. We are determined n o t
to s teal and n o t to p o s s e s s anything that s h o u l d b e l o n g t o
others . We will respect the property o f o thers, but will try t o
preven t others from profiting from human suffering or t h e
s u ffering o f o ther beings.
Bringing to our awareness the pain caused by social injustice, the
Thirteenth Mindfulness Training urges us to work for a more liv­
able society. This training is linked with the Fourth Mindfulness
Training (the awareness of suffering) , the Fifth Mindfulness
Training (lifestyle) , the Eleventh Mindfulness Training (right
livelihood), and the Twelfth Mindfulness Training (the protec­
tion of life). In order to deeply comprehend this training, we
must also meditate on these four mindfulness trainings.
    To develop ways to prevent others from profiting from human
suffering and the suffering of other beings is the duty of legisla­
tors and politicians. H owever, each of us can also act in this
direction . To some degree, we can be close to oppressed people
and help them protect their right to life and defend themselves
against oppression and exploitation. Letting people profit from
human suffering or the suffering of other beings is something we
cannot do. As a community we must tly to prevent this . How to
work for justice in our ovvn city is a problem we have to consider.
The bodhisattvas' vows-to help all sentient beings-are
immense. Each of us can vow to sit in their rescue boats .


                                                 INTE RB E I N G / 103
 The Fourteenth Mindfulness Training
 (For lay members): Aware that sexual relations motivated by
 craving cannot dissipate the feeling ofloneliness but will cre­
 ate more suffering, frustration, and isolation, we are deter­
 mined not to engage in sexual relations without mutual
 understanding, love, and a long-term commitment. In sexual
 relations, we must be aware of future suffering that may be
 caused. We know that to preserve the happiness of ourselves
 and others, we must respect the rights and commitments of
 ourselves and others. We will do everything in our power to
 protect children from sexual abuse and to protect couples
 and families from being broken by sexual misconduct. We
 will treat our bodies with respect and preserve our vital ener­
 gies (sexual, breath, spirit) for the realization of our bodhi­
 sattva ideal. We will be fully aware of the responsibility of
 bringing new lives into the world, and will meditate on the
world into which we are bringing new beings.
 (For monastic members) : Aware that the aspiration of a
 monk or a nun can only be realized when he or she wholly
leaves behind the bonds of worldly love, we are committed to
practicing chastity and to helping others protect themselves.
We are aware that loneliness and suffering cannot be allevi­
ated by the coming together of two bodies in a sexual rela­
tionship, but by the practice of true understanding and
compassion. We know that a sexual relationship will destroy
our life as a monk or a nun, will prevent us from realizing our
ideal of serving living beings, and will harm others. We are
determined not to suppress or mistreat our body or to look


1 0 4 / BEING PEACE
upon our body as only an instrument, but to learn to handle
our body with respect. We are determined to preserve vital
energies ( s exual, breath, spirit) for the realization of our
bodhisattva ideal.
You may have the impression that this mindfulness training dis­
courages having children, but it is not so. It only urges us to be
aware of what we are doing. Is our world safe enough to bring in
more children? If you want to bring more children into the world,
then do something for the world.
    This training also has to do with celibacy. Traditionally, Bud­
dhist monks were celibate for at least three reasons . The first is
that the monks in the time of the Buddha were urged to practice
meditation for most of the day. They had to be in contact with the
people in the village in order to teach them the Dharma, and in
order to ask for some food for the day. If a monk had to support a
family, he would not be able to perform his duties as a monk.
    The second reason is that sexual energy had to be preserved
for meditation. In the religious and medical traditions of Asia,
the human person was said to have three sources of energy: sex­
ual, breath, and spirit. Sexual energy is what you spend during
sexual intercourse. Breath energy is the kind of energy you spend
when you talk too much and breathe too little . Spirit energy is
energy that you spend when you worry too much and do not
sleep well. If you spend these three sources of energy, your body
will not be strong enough to penetrate deeply into reality and
realize the way. Buddhist monks observed celibacy, not because
of moral admonition, but to conserve energy. Someone on a long
fast knows how important it is to preserve these three sources of
energy.


                                                  INTERBEING / 1 0 5
   The third reason Buddhist monks observed celibacy is the
 question of suffering. Even today, if we go to India we see many
 children without food and many children sick without medicine.
 One woman can give birth to ten, twelve children, without being
 able to feed two or three properly. The existence of suffering is
 the first truth in Buddhism. To bring a child into the world is a
great responsibility. If you are wealthy, maybe you can do it with
no pl'oblem. But if you are poor, this is a real concern. To be
reborn means first to be reborn in your children. Your children
are a continuation of yourself. You are reborn in them, and you
continue the cycle of suffering. Aware that having more c hil­
dren in the society of his day would be to make them suffer, the
Buddha urged the monks not to have children. I think that dur­
ing the past 2, 500 years, Buddhist monks in many countries
have helped curb the birth rate. That is quite important.
   The Fourteenth Mindfulness Training urges us to respect our
own body and to maintain our energy for the realization of the
Way. Not only meditation, but any efforts that are required to
change the world require energy. We should take good care of
ourselves .
   In m y opinion, the liberation o f sexual behavior i n the \iVest
has caused a number of good results, but has also caused some
problems . The liberation of women, because of modern birth
control methods, has been something very real. In the past,
young girls in Asia as well as Europe had enormous problems and
some even committed suicide when they became pregnant.
Since the discovery of birth control, these kinds of tragedies have
lessened considerably. But the liberation of sexual behavior has
also caused much stress, much trouble. I think the fact that
many people suffer from depression is p artly because of that.


1 06 / BEING PEACE
Please meditate on this problem. It is an important problem for
Western society.
   If you wish to have children, please do something for the world
you will bring them into. That will make you someone who works
for peace, in one way or another.






 7
 MEDITATION IN DAILY LIFE
 D UR I N G RETREATS, from time t o time a B e l l Master invites the
bell to sound, silently reciting this poem first:
       Body, speech, and mind in perfect oneness,
      I send my heart along with the sound of the bel l .
      M ay the hearer awaken from forgetfulness
      and transcend all anxiety and sorrow.
   Then he or she breathes three times, and invites the bell to
sound. When the rest of us hear the bell, we stop our thinking
and breathe in and out three times, reciting this verse:
      Listen, listen,
      this wonderful sound
      brings me back to my true self.
   Meditation i s to be aware of what is going on: in your body,
in your feelings , in your mind, and in the world. The most pre­
cious practice in B uddhism is meditation, and it is important
to practice meditation in a joyful mood. We have to smile a lot
in order to be able to meditate. The bell of mindfulness helps
us to do this.


1 1 0 / BEING PEACE
Suppose we have a son who becomes an unbearable young man.
It may be hard for us to love him. That is natural. In order to be
loved, a person should be lovable. If our son has become diffi­
cult to love, we will be very unhappy. We wish we could love him,
but the only way we can is to understand him, to understand his
situation. We have to take our son as the subject of our medita­
tion. Instead of taking the concept of emptiness or some other
subject, we can take our son as a concrete subject for our medi­
tation.
     First, we need to stop the invasion of feelings and thoughts,
which deplete our strength in meditation, and cultivate the
capacity, the power of concentration. In Sanskrit this is called
"samadhi." For a child to do his homework, he has to stop chew­
ing gum and stop listening to the radio so he can concentrate on
the h omework. If we want to understand our son, we have to
learn to stop the things that divert our attention. Concentration,
sClmCldhi, is the first practice of meditation.
     When we have a light bulb, for the light to concentrate on
our book we need a lampshade to keep the light from dispers­
ing, to concentrate the light so that we can read the book more
easily. The practice of concentration is like acquiring a lamp­
shade to help us concentrate our mind on something. While
doing sitting or walking meditation , cutting the future, cutting
the past, dwelling in the present time, we develop our own
power of c oncentration . With that power of concentration, we
can look deeply into the problem. This is insight meditation.
First we are aware of the problem, focusing all our attention on
the problem, and then we look deeply into it in order to under-


                                      MEDITATION IN DAILY LIFE / I I I
 stand its real nature, in this case the nature of our son's unhap­
piness.
    We don't blame our son. We just want to understand why he
has become like that. Through this method of meditation, we
find out all the causes, near and far, that have led to our son's
present state of being. The more we see, the more we under­
stand. The more we understand, the easier it is for us to have
compassion and love . Understanding is the source of love.
Understanding is love itself. Understanding is another name for
love ; love is another name for understanding. When we practice
Buddhism, it is helpful to practice in this way.
   When you grow a tree, if it does not grow well, you don't blame
the tree. You look into the reasons it is not doing well. It may need
fertilizer, or more water, or less sun. You never blame the tree, yet
we blame our son. If we know how to take care of him, he will
grow well, like a tree. Blaming has no effect at all. Never blame,
never try to persuade using reason and arguments. They never
lead to any positive effect. That is my experience. No argument,
no reasoning, no blame, just understanding. If you understand,
and you show that you understand, you can love, and the situa­
tion will change.
The bell of mindfulness is the voice of the Buddha calling us
back to ourselves . We have to respect that sound, s top our think­
ing and talking, and go back to ourselves with a smile and breath­
ing. It is not a Buddha from the outside . It is our own Buddha
who calls us. If we cannot hear the sound of the bell, then we
cannot hear other sounds which also come from the Buddha,


I I 2 / BEING PEACE
like the sound of the wind, the sound of the bird, even the sounds
of cars or a baby crying. They are all a call from the Buddha to
return to ourselves. Practicing with a bell from time to time is
helpful, and once you can practice with a bell, you can practice
with the wind and other sounds. After that you can practice not
only with the sounds, but with forms . The sunlight coming
through your window is also a calling from the Dharmakaya in
order for the Buddhakaya to be, and also for the Sanghakaya to
be real.
     "Calming, Smiling. Present moment, Wonderful moment."
While you sit you can recite that, and while you do walking med­
itation you can use that, or you can use other methods, like count­
ing: Breathing in, one . Breathing out, one. Breathing in, two.
Out, two. In, three; out, three. Until ten, and then you decrease:
ten, and then nine, eight, seven. Counting the breath is one of
the ways to educate yourself for concentration, samadhi.
     If you do not have enough concentration, you cannot be
strong enough to break through, to have a breakthrough into a
subject of your meditation. Therefore breathing, walking, sit­
ting, and other practices are primarily for you to realize some
degree of concentration. This is called "Stopping." Stop, in order
to concentrate. Just as the lampshade stops the light from dis­
persing so you can read your book more easily, the first step of
meditation is stopping, stopping the dispersion, concentrating
on one subject. The best subject, the most available subject, is
your breathing. Breathing is wonderful. It unites body and mind.
Whether you count breaths orjust follow them, it is for stopping.
     Stopping and seeing are very close. As soon as you stop, the
words on the page become clear, the problem of our son becomes
clear. Stop and look, that's meditation, insight meditation. InSight


                                      MEDITATION IN DAILY LIFE I I l 3
means you have a vision, an insight into reality. Stopping is also
to see, and seeing helps to stop. The two are one. Vie do so much,
we run so quickly, the situation is difficult, and many people say,
"Don't just sit there, do something." But doing more things may
make the situation worse. So you should say, "Don't just do some­
thing, sit there. " Sit there, stop, be yourself first, and begin from
there. That is the meaning of meditation. When you sit in the
meditation hall or at home or wherever you are, you can do that.
But you have to really sit. Just sitting is not enough. Sit and be.
Sitting without being is not sitting. Be stopping and seeing.
   There are so many methods of stopping and seeing, and intel­
ligent teachers will be able to invent ways to help you. In Bud­
dhism it is said that there are 84,000 Dharma doors for you to
enter reality. Dharma doors are means of practice, ways of prac­
tice. When we ride on a horse that is out of control, I think our
deepest wish is to stop. How can we stop? We have to resist the
speed, the losing of ourselves, and therefore we must organize a
resistance. Spending two hours with a cup of tea during a tea
meditation is an act of resistance, nonviolent resistance . We can
do it because we have a Sanghakaya. We can do it together, we
can resist a way of life that makes us lose ourselves . Walking
meditation is also resistance. Sitting is also resistance. So if you
want to stop the course of armaments, you have to resist, and
begin by resisting in your own daily life. I saw a car from New
York with a bumper sticker, "Let peace begin with me." That's
correct. And let me begin with peace. That is also correct.


1 1 4 / BEING PEACE
Wal king meditation can be very enjoyable. We walk slowly, alone
or with friends, if possible in some beautiful plac e . Walking med­
itation is really to enjoy the walking. Walking not in order to
arrive, just for walking. The purpose is to be in the present
moment and enjoy each step you make. Therefore you have to
shake off all worries and anxieties, not thinking of the future, not
thinking of the past, just enjoying the present moment. You can
take the hand of a child as you do it. You walk, you make steps as
if you are the happiest person on Earth.
     We walk all the time, but usually it is more like running. When
we walk like that, we print anxiety and sorrow on the Earth. We
have to walk in a way that we only print peace and serenity on
Earth. EvelY one of us can do that provided that we want it very
much . Any child can do that. If we can take one step like that,
we can take two, three, four, and five. \;\fhen we are abl e to take
one step peacefully, happily, we are for the cause of peace and
happiness for the whole of humankind . Walking meditation is a
wonderful practice.
The Buddha's basic Dharma talk concerning meditation, the
Satipatthana Sutta, is available in Pali, Chinese, and many other
languages, including English and French. According to this text,
to meditate is to be aware of what is going on in your body, in
your feelings, in your mind, and in the objects of your mind,
which are the world. I f you are aware of what is going on, then
you can see problems as they unfold, and you can help prevent
many of them. \;\fhen things explode, it is too late . How we deal
with our daily lives is the most important question. How we deal


                                      MEDITATION IN DAILY LIFE I 1 I 5
 with our feelings, our speaking, with ordinary things every day is
just meditation. We must learn to apply meditation in our daily
 lives .
    There are many easy things t o do. For instance, before eating
 the evening meal, everyone can sit around the table, and prac­
 tice breathing, three slow breaths. You breathe to recover your­
 self, to be yourself. I am sure that every time you breathe deeply
 like that, you become entirelyyoursclf again. Then before eating
you can look at everyone and smile, just two or three seconds,
 not much, for each person. We never have time to look at each
other, even those we love, and soon it will be too late . It is won­
derful to do that, to openly appreciate everyone in our own
household.
    In Plum Village, it is a child who reads the gatha before eat­
ing. Holding up a bowl of rice, he knows he is very lucky. Being
a refugee he knows that in many countries of Southeast Asia,
children do not have enough to eat. The kind of rice that they
buy in the West is the best kind of rice imported from Thailand.
The children know that even in Thailand, Thai children do not
have the opportunity to eat such rice. They eat poorer quality
rice. The good rice is exported for the country to get foreign cur­
rency. When a refugee boy holds up a bowl of rice, he has to
remember that he is lucky. He knows that 40,000 children his age
die in the world each day because of hunger. Then the child says
something like this: "Today, on the table there are good things
that Mommy just cooked . There I see Papa, there I see my
brother, there I see my sister, it is so good to be together and eat
together like this, while there are many who are hungry. I feel
very thankful."
    There are s o many practices we can do to bring awareness into


I I6 I B EING PEACE
our everyday lives: breathing between telephone calls, walking
meditation between business meetings, practicing meditation
while helping hungry children or war victims. Buddhism must
be engaged. What is the use of practicing meditation if it does
not have anything to do with our daily lives?
You can feel very happy while practicing breathing and smiling.
The conditions are available. You can do it in a meditation hall.
You can do it at home. You can do it in a park, along the riverside,
an)T\vhere. I would like to suggest that in each home we have a
tiny room for breathing. Vie have a room for sleeping, a room for
eating, and a room for cooking, why not have one room for
breathing? B reathing is very important.
    I suggest that that room be decorated very simply, and not be
too bright. You may want to have a small bell , one with a beauti­
ful sound, a few cushions or chairs, and perhaps a pot of flowers
to remind us of our true nature. Children can arrange flowers in
mindfulness, smiling. If your household has five members, you
can have five cushions or chairs, plus a few for guests . From time
to time, you might like to invite a guest to come and sit and
breathe with you for five minutes , or three minute s .
    If you want t o have a statue o r a painting of a Buddha, please
be choosy. Many times I see Buddhas who are not relaxed and
peaceful. The artists who make them do not practice breathing,
smiling. Be choosy if you ask a Buddha to come home. A Bud­
dha should be smiling, happy, beautiful, for the sake of our chil­
dren. If they look at the Buddha and don't feel refreshed and
happy, then it is not a good statue. If you don't find a beautiful


                                     MEDITATION IN DAILY LIFE I I I7
 Buddha, wait, and have a flower instead. A flower is a Buddha.
 A flower has Buddha nature.
    I know of families where children go into a room like that after
 breakfast, sit down and breathe ten times, in-out-one, in-out­
 two, in-out-three, ten times, and then they go to school. This is
 a very beautiful practice. If your child doesn't wish to breathe ten
 times, how about three times? Beginning the day with being a
 Buddha is a very nice way to start the day. If we are a Buddha in
 the morning and we try to nourish the Buddha throughout the
 day, we may be able to come home at the end of a day with a
 smile-the Buddha is still there.
    When you become agitated, you do not have to do or say any­
 thing. Just follow your breathing and walk slowly into that room.
The "room" for breathing also symbolizes our own inner Buddha
 Land, so we can enter it whenever we need to, even if we are not
at home. I have a friend who, whenever he becomes agitated,
enters the breathing room in his home. He sits down respect­
fully, breathes in and out three times, invites the bell to sound,
and recites the gatha. Immediately he feels better. If he needs to
sit longer, he stays there. From time to time, while his wife is
preparing dinner, she hears the sound of the bell, and it reminds
her to be mindful in her work. At such times, she deeply appre­
ciates her husband. "He is so wonderful, quite different from
others . He knows how to deal with anger." If she has been irri­
tated, her own resentment subsides. Sometimes she stops cut­
ting vegetables and goes into the breathing room to sit with him.
This picture is so lovely, more beautiful than an expensive paint­
ing. Doing things in this way has a good effect on everyone,
teaching by example, not j ust with words. When your child is agi­
tated, you don't have to say, "Go to that room!" You can take his


I I S ! BEING PEACE
or her hand and walk together into the room for breathing, and
sit quietly together. This is the best education for peace.
     It is really beautiful to begin the day by being a Buddha. Each
time ',,\le feel ourselves about to leave our Buddha, we can sit and
breathe until we return to our true self. There are three things I
can recommend to you: arranging to have a breathing room in
your home, a room for meditation; practicing breathing, sitting,
for a few minutes evelY morning at home with your children; and
going out for a slow walking meditation with your children before
going to sleep, just ten minutes is enough. These things are very
important. They can change our civilization.


Parallax Press, a nonprofit organization, publishes books on
engaged Buddhism and the practice of mindfulness by Thich
Nhat Hanh and other authors . All of Thich Nhat Hanh's work is
available at our online store and in our free catalog. For a copy of
the catalog, please contact:
                           Parallax Press
                          P. O . Box 73 5 5
                       Berkeley, CA 94707
                        Tel : 5 1 0 5 2 5 -0 1 0 1
                       www. parallax.org


Monastics and laypeople practice the art of mindful living in the
tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh at retreat communities in France
and the United States. To reach any of these communities, or for
information about individuals and families joining for a practice
period, please contact:
                             Plum Village
                            1 3 Martineau
                     3 3 5 80 Dieulivol, France
                       www.plumvillage.org
                       Blue Cliff Monastery
                        3 Mindfulness Road
                      Pine Bush, NY 1 2 566
                  www .bluecliffmonastery.org
                       Deer Park M onastery
                          2499 Melru Lane
                      Escondido, CA 9 2026
                  www.deerparkmonastery.org
The Mindfulness Bell, a J oumal of the Art of Mindful Living in
 the Tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh, is published three times a
  year by Plum Village. To subscribe or to see the worldwide
      directory of Sanghas, visit www.mindfulnessbell.org


 ABOUT THICH NHAT HANH
 THI C H N HAT HANH was born in central Vietnam in 1926, and he
 left home at age sixtee n to become a Zen monk. He founded the
 School ofYouth for Social Service, Van Hanh Buddhist University,
 and the Orde r o f Interbeing. In 1966, he was invited by the Fellow­
 ship of Reconciliation to tour the United States to describe to us
 the enormous suffering of his people . Because of his fierce neu­
 trality, he was banned from returning to Vietnam. H e was granted
 asylum in France, where he founded Plum Village, a meditation
 community, in 1982 . Thich Nhat Hanh is the author of over sixty
books, including Present M011'lent, Wonderful Moment, Teachings
on Love, and Old Path White Clouds.
ABOUT MAYUMI GOA
B O R N IN A S U B U R B OF TOKYO IN 194 1 , Mayumi Oda shares Thich
 Nhat Hanh's understanding of the sufferings of war, coupled with
a passionate commitment to the expression of joy. An internation­
ally recognized artist, her bold contemporary imagery has been
identified with the work of Matisse. She has had many one­
woman exhibits in Japan, Europe, and the U . S . , and her work is in
the permanent collections of the Museum of Modern Art in
NewYork, the Museum of Fine Arts in Boston, and the Library of
Congress. Mayumi Oda lives in H awaii.
ABOUT JACK KORNFIELO
JACK KORNFIELD is the co-founder of the Insight Meditation Soci­
ety and of the Spirit Rock Center. His books inclu de A Path With
Heart , After the EcstaS)) the Laundry, Seeking the Heart of Wisdom
(with Joseph Goldstein), and Teachings of the Buddha.








      “Most people are afraid of suffering. But suffering
is a kind of mud to help the lotus flower of happiness grow.
       There can be no lotus flower without the mud.”
                 —thich      n h at h a n h


The Art of Transforming Suffering  9
Saying Hello   21
Looking Deeply     31
Ease  45
Five Practices for Nurturing Happiness 55
Happiness Is Not an Individual Matter  73


one   The Sixteen Breathing Exercises  84
two   The Six Mantras    92
three   Being Present with Strong Emotions  101
four   Inviting the Bell 103
five  Metta   104
six  Deep Relaxation    115
seven   The Five Mindfulness Trainings  117
eight   Walking Meditation   121




W          e all want to be happy and there are many books and teachers
           in the world that try to help people be happier. Yet we all con-
tinue to suffer.
     Therefore, we may think that we’re “doing it wrong.” Somehow we
are “failing at happiness.” That isn’t true. Being able to enjoy happi-
ness doesn’t require that we have zero suffering. In fact, the art of hap-
piness is also the art of suffering well. When we learn to acknowledge,
embrace, and understand our suffering, we suffer much less. Not only
that, but we’re also able to go further and transform our suffering into
understanding, compassion, and joy for ourselves and for others.
     One of the most difficult things for us to accept is that there is
no realm where there’s only happiness and there’s no suffering. This
doesn’t mean that we should despair. Suffering can be transformed. As
soon as we open our mouth to say “suffering,” we know that the opposite
of suffering is already there as well. Where there is suffering, there is
happiness.
     According to the creation story in the biblical book of Genesis, God
said, “Let there be light.” I like to imagine that light replied, saying,
“God, I have to wait for my twin brother, darkness, to be with me. I can’t
be there without the darkness.” God asked, “Why do you need to wait?
Darkness is there.” Light answered, “In that case, then I am also already
there.”
     If we focus exclusively on pursuing happiness, we may regard suf-
fering as something to be ignored or resisted. We think of it as some-
thing that gets in the way of happiness. But the art of happiness is also
and at the same time the art of knowing how to suffer well. If we know
how to use our suffering, we can transform it and suffer much less.
Knowing how to suffer well is essential to realizing true happiness.


                   the Art of Transforming Suffering
           suffering and happiness
                   a r e n o t s e pa r at e
When we suffer, we tend to think that suffering is all there is at that
moment, and happiness belongs to some other time or place. People
often ask, “Why do I have to suffer?” Thinking we should be able to
have a life without any suffering is as deluded as thinking we should be
able to have a left side without a right side. The same is true of think-
ing we have a life in which no happiness whatsoever is to be found. If
the left says, “Right, you have to go away. I don’t want you. I only want
the left”—that’s nonsense, because then the left would have to stop
existing as well. If there’s no right, then there’s no left. Where there is
no suffering, there can be no happiness either, and vice versa.
     If we can learn to see and skillfully engage with both the pres-
ence of happiness and the presence of suffering, we will go in the
direction of enjoying life more. Every day we go a little farther in
that direction, and eventually we realize that suffering and happi-
ness are not two separate things.
     Cold air can be painful if you aren’t wearing enough warm clothes.
But when you’re feeling overheated or you’re walking outside with
proper clothing, the bracing sensation of cold air can be a source of
feeling joy and aliveness. Suffering isn’t some kind of external, objec-
tive source of oppression and pain. There might be things that cause
you to suffer, such as loud music or bright lights, which may bring
other people joy. There are things that bring you joy that annoy other
people. The rainy day that ruins your plans for a picnic is a boon for
the farmer whose field is parched.
      Happiness is possible right now, today—but happiness cannot be
without suffering. Some people think that in order to be happy they
                                     11


                              no mud, no lotus
must avoid all suffering, and so they are constantly vigilant, constantly
worrying. They end up sacrificing all their spontaneity, freedom, and
joy. This isn’t correct. If you can recognize and accept your pain with-
out running away from it, you will discover that although pain is there,
joy can also be there at the same time.
     Some say that suffering is only an illusion or that to live wisely
we have to “transcend” both suffering and joy. I say the opposite. The
way to suffer well and be happy is to stay in touch with what is actu-
ally going on; in doing so, you will gain liberating insights into the true
nature of suffering and of joy.
                  no mud, no lotus
Both suffering and happiness are of an organic nature, which means
they are both transitory; they are always changing. The flower, when it
wilts, becomes the compost. The compost can help grow a flower again.
Happiness is also organic and impermanent by nature. It can become
suffering and suffering can become happiness again.
     If you look deeply into a flower, you see that a flower is made only
of nonflower elements. In that flower there is a cloud. Of course we
know a cloud isn’t a flower, but without a cloud, a flower can’t be. If
there’s no cloud, there’s no rain, and no flower can grow. You don’t have
to be a dreamer to see a cloud floating in a flower. It’s really there. Sun-
light is also there. Sunlight isn’t flower, but without sunlight no flower
is possible.
     If we continue to look deeply into the flower, we see many other
things, like the earth and the minerals. Without them a flower cannot
be. So it’s a fact that a flower is made only of nonflower elements. A
                                      12


                   the Art of Transforming Suffering
flower can’t be by herself alone. A flower can only inter-be with every-
thing else. You can’t remove the sunlight, the soil, or the cloud from
the flower.
     In each of our Plum Village practice centers around the world, we
have a lotus pond. Everyone knows we need to have mud for lotuses to
grow. The mud doesn’t smell so good, but the lotus flower smells very
good. If you don’t have mud, the lotus won’t manifest. You can’t grow
lotus flowers on marble. Without mud, there can be no lotus.
     It is possible of course to get stuck in the “mud” of life. It’s easy
enough to notice mud all over you at times. The hardest thing to prac-
tice is not allowing yourself to be overwhelmed by despair. When
you’re overwhelmed by despair, all you can see is suffering everywhere
you look. You feel as if the worst thing is happening to you. But we
must remember that suffering is a kind of mud that we need in order to
generate joy and happiness. Without suffering, there’s no happiness.
So we shouldn’t discriminate against the mud. We have to learn how to
embrace and cradle our own suffering and the suffering of the world,
with a lot of tenderness.
     When I lived in Vietnam during the war, it was difficult to see
our way through that dark and heavy mud. It seemed like the destruc-
tion would just go on and on forever. Every day people would ask me
if I thought the war would end soon. It was very difficult to answer,
because there was no end in sight. But I knew if I said, “I don’t know,”
that would only water their seeds of despair. So when people asked me
that question, I replied, “Everything is impermanent, even war. It will
end some day.” Knowing that, we could continue to work for peace.
And indeed the war did end. Now the former mortal enemies are busily
trading and touring back and forth, and people throughout the world
enjoy practicing our tradition’s teachings on mindfulness and peace.
                                    13


                            no mud, no lotus
     If you know how to make good use of the mud, you can grow beau-
tiful lotuses. If you know how to make good use of suffering, you can
produce happiness. We do need some suffering to make happiness pos-
sible. And most of us have enough suffering inside and around us to be
able to do that. We don’t have to create more.
              did the buddha suffer
When I was a young monk, I believed that the Buddha didn’t suffer
once he had become enlightened. Naively I asked myself, “What’s the
use of becoming a Buddha if you continue to suffer?” The Buddha did
suffer, because he had a body, feelings, and perceptions, like all of us.
Sometimes he probably had a headache. Sometimes he suffered from
rheumatism. If he happened to eat something not well cooked, then
he had intestinal problems. So he suffered physically, and he suffered
emotionally as well. When one of his beloved students died, he suf-
fered. How can you not suffer when a dear friend has just died? The
Buddha wasn’t a stone. He was a human being. But because he had a lot
of insight, wisdom, and compassion, he knew how to suffer and so he
suffered much less.
             the four noble truths
The very first teaching the Buddha gave after his enlightenment was
about suffering. It’s called the Four Noble Truths. The Buddha’s Four
Noble Truths are: there is suffering; there is a course of action that
generates suffering; suffering ceases (i.e., there is happiness); and
                                    14


                   the Art of Transforming Suffering
there is a course of action leading to the cessation of suffering (the
arising of happiness).
      When you first hear that suffering is a Noble Truth, you might
wonder what’s so noble about suffering? The Buddha was saying that
if we can recognize suffering, and if we embrace it and look deeply
into its roots, then we’ll be able to let go of the habits that feed it and,
at the same time, find a way to happiness. Suffering has its beneficial
aspects. It can be an excellent teacher.
         w h at s u f f e r i n g i s m a d e o f
There is the suffering of the body, including the sensations of pain,
illness, hunger, and physical injury. Some of this suffering is simply
unavoidable. Then there is the suffering of the mind, including anxi-
ety, jealousy, despair, fear, and anger. We have the seeds, the potential
in us for understanding, love, compassion, and insight, as well as the
seeds of anger, hate, and greed. While we can’t avoid all the suffering
in life, we can suffer much less by not watering the seeds of suffering
inside us.
      Are you at war with your body? Do you neglect or punish your
body? Have you truly gotten to know your body? Can you feel at home
with your body? Suffering can be either physical or mental or both,
but every kind of suffering manifests somewhere in the body and
creates tension and stress. We are told that we should release the
tension in our body. Many of us have tried very hard! We want to
release the tension in our body, but we can’t release it. Our attempts at
reducing tension in us won’t work unless we first acknowledge that
it’s there.
                                     15


                             no mud, no lotus
      When you cut your finger, you just wash it and your body knows
how to heal. When a nonhuman animal living in the forest is injured,
she knows what to do. She stops searching for something to eat or look-
ing for a mate. She knows, through generations of ancestral knowl-
edge, that it’s not good for her to do so. She finds a quiet place and just
lies down, doing nothing. Nonhuman animals instinctively know that
stopping is the best way to get healed. They don’t need a doctor, a drug-
store, or a pharmacist.
      We human beings used to have this kind of wisdom. But we have
lost touch with it. We don’t know how to rest anymore. We don’t allow
the body to rest, to release the tension, and heal. We rely almost
entirely on medication to deal with sickness and pain. Yet the most
effective ways to ease and transform our suffering are already available
to us without any prescription and at no financial cost. I’m not sug-
gesting that you should throw away all your medications. Some of us
do need to use certain medicines. But we can sometimes use them in
smaller quantities and to much greater effect when we know how to let
our body and mind truly rest.
                   healing medicine
The main affliction of our modern civilization is that we don’t know
how to handle the suffering inside us and we try to cover it up with all
kinds of consumption. Retailers peddle a plethora of classic and novel
devices to help us cover up the suffering inside. But unless and until
we’re able to face our suffering, we can’t be present and available to
life, and happiness will continue to elude us.
      There are many people who have enormous suffering, and don’t
                                     16


                  the Art of Transforming Suffering
know how to handle it. For many people, it starts already at a very
young age. So why don’t schools teach our young people the way to
manage suffering? If a student is very unhappy, he can’t concentrate
and he can’t learn. The suffering of each of us affects others. The more
we learn about the art of suffering well, the less suffering there will be
in the world.
     Mindfulness is the best way to be with our suffering without being
overwhelmed by it. Mindfulness is the capacity to dwell in the present
moment, to know what’s happening in the here and now. For example,
when we’re lifting our two arms, we’re conscious of the fact that we’re
lifting our arms. Our mind is with our lifting of our arms, and we don’t
think about the past or the future, because lifting our arms is what’s
happening in the present moment.
     To be mindful means to be aware. It’s the energy that knows what
is happening in the present moment. Lifting our arms and knowing
that we’re lifting our arms—that’s mindfulness, mindfulness of our
action. When we breathe in and we know we’re breathing in, that’s
mindfulness. When we make a step and we know that the steps are
taking place, we are mindful of the steps. Mindfulness is always mind-
fulness of something. It’s the energy that helps us be aware of what is
happening right now and right here, in our body, in our feelings, in our
perceptions, and around us.
     With mindfulness, you can recognize the presence of the suffer-
ing in you and in the world. And it’s with that same energy that you
tenderly embrace the suffering. By being aware of your in-breath and
out-breath you generate the energy of mindfulness, so you can con-
tinue to cradle the suffering. Practitioners of mindfulness can help
and support each other in recognizing, embracing, and transforming
suffering. With mindfulness we are no longer afraid of pain. We can
                                   17


                            no mud, no lotus
even go further and make good use of suffering to generate the energy
of understanding and compassion that heals us and we can help others
to heal and be happy as well.
           g e n e r at i n g m i n d f u l n e s s
The way we start producing the medicine of mindfulness is by stop-
ping and taking a conscious breath, giving our complete attention to
our in-breath and our out-breath. When we stop and take a breath in
this way, we unite body and mind and come back home to ourselves.
We feel our bodies more fully. We are truly alive only when the mind is
with the body. The great news is that oneness of body and mind can be
realized just by one in-breath. Maybe we have not been kind enough to
our body for some time. Recognizing the tension, the pain, the stress
in our body, we can bathe it in our mindful awareness, and that is the
beginning of healing.
     If we take care of the suffering inside us, we have more clarity,
energy, and strength to help address the suffering violence, poverty,
and inequity of our loved ones as well as the suffering in our commu-
nity and the world. If, however, we are preoccupied with the fear and
despair in us, we can’t help remove the suffering of others. There is an
art to suffering well. If we know how to take care of our suffering, we
not only suffer much, much less, we also create more happiness around
us and in the world.
                                   18




T        he first step in the art of transforming suffering is to come
         home to our suffering and recognize it. For most of us, there’s
always a mental discourse going on day and night in our heads. We
relive the past, we worry about the future. We don’t stop to take a
breath, to even notice if we’re suffering—until suddenly, seemingly out
of nowhere, the suffering overwhelms us. Our thinking, perceiving,
and worrying take away all the space inside us, and keep us from being
in touch with what’s happening moment to moment.
     The Buddha said that nothing can survive without food. This is
true, not just for the physical existence of living beings, but also for
states of mind. Love needs to be nurtured and fed to survive; and our
suffering also survives because we enable and feed it. We ruminate
on suffering, regret, and sorrow. We chew on them, swallow them,
bring them back up, and eat them again and again. If we’re feeding
our suffering while we’re walking, working, eating, or talking, we are
making ourselves victims of the ghosts of the past, of the future, or our
worries in the present. We’re not living our lives.
     If we try to use consumption to ignore or distract ourselves from
our suffering, we end up making the suffering worse. We turn on the tele-
vision. We talk or text or gossip on the phone. We get on the Internet. We
find ourselves in front of the refrigerator over and over again.
     When we cut ourselves off from the pain in our mind, we’re also
abandoning our bodies where suffering is being stored. When we feel
loneliness and despair, we seek to cover them up and pretend they’re
not there. We don’t feel very well inside, so in order to forget, we go
and look for something to eat even if we’re not hungry at all. We eat
in an attempt to feel better, but we end up becoming addicted to eat-
ing, because we are trying to cover up the suffering inside, and the real
problem is left unaddressed. Or we may become addicted to computer


                               Say i n g H e l l o
games, or other kinds of audiovisual entertainment.
     Electronic distractions not only fail to help heal the underlying
suffering, they may contain stories or images that feed our craving,
jealousy, anger, or despair. Instead of making us feel better, they numb
us only briefly, then make us feel worse. To consume in order to cover
up our suffering doesn’t work. We need a spiritual practice to have the
strength and skill to look deeply into our suffering, to get insight into
it and make a breakthrough.
                      stopping and
        acknowledging suffering
When suffering arises, the first thing to do is to stop, follow our breath-
ing, and acknowledge it. Don’t try to deny uncomfortable emotions or
push them down.
     Breathing in, I know suffering is there.
     Breathing out, I say hello to my suffering.
To take one mindful breath requires the presence of our mind, our
body, and our intention. With our conscious breath, we reunite
our body and mind and arrive in the present moment. Just breathing
in mindfully already brings us a surprising amount of freedom. With
each breath, we generate mindful energy, bringing mind and body
together in the present moment to receive this caring acknowledg-
ment of our suffering. In just two or three breaths taken with your full
attention, you may notice that regret and sorrow about the past have
paused, as well as uncertainty, fear, and worries about the future.
                                      23


                             no mud, no lotus
           body and mind together
Each of us has a body, but we aren’t always in touch with it. Maybe our
body needs us, our body is calling us, but we don’t hear it. We’re so
caught up in our job, our computer, our phone, or in our conversation,
we can forget we even have a body.
      If we can get in touch with our body, then we can also get in touch
with our feelings. There are many feelings calling to us. Every feeling
is like our child. Suffering is a hurt child crying out to us. But we ignore
the voice of the child within.
      The process of healing begins when we mindfully breathe in. In
daily life, very often our body is here but our mind is off in the past,
in the future, or in our projects. The mind is not with the body. When
we breathe in and focus our attention on our in-breath, we reunite
body and mind. We become aware of what is going on in the present
moment, in our body, in our perceptions, and around us.
      When we bring our mind home to our body, something wonderful
happens; our mental discourse stops its chattering. Thinking can be
productive, but the reality is that most of our thinking is unproduc-
tive. When we think, it may be easy for us to be lost in our thinking.
But when we use our breath to bring our mind home to the body, we can
stop the thinking.
      When you come back to yourself and breathe mindfully, your
mind’s attention has only one object, your breath. If you continue to
breathe in and out mindfully, you maintain that state of presence and
freedom. Your mind will be clearer and you will make better decisions.
It’s much better to make a decision when your mind is clear and free
rather than in the sway of fear, anger, and worries.
      When I was a young monk, I believed that it took a long time to
                                     24


                               Say i n g H e l l o
get any kind of insight. The truth is, there are insights that can come
right away. When you practice mindfulness of breathing, you know
right away that you are alive, and that to be alive is a wonder. If you can
be aware that you have a living body, and notice when there’s tension in
your body, that’s already an important insight. With that insight, you
have already begun to diagnose the situation. You don’t need to prac-
tice eight years or twenty years in order to wake up.
     Breathing mindfully isn’t something hard to do. You don’t have to
suffer while breathing. You’re already doing it all day long. You don’t
need to struggle to control your breathing. In fact, breathing in can
become a real pleasure. You just allow yourself to breathe in naturally
while focusing your attention on your in-breath. It’s like the morning
sunshine on a flower that has closed overnight. The sunshine doen’t
interfere with the flower. The sunshine just embraces and subtly per-
meates the flower. Embraced by the energy of the sunshine, the flower
begins to bloom.
           the pull of distractions
When we stop the busyness of the mind and come back to ourselves,
the enormity and rawness of our suffering can seem very intense
because we are so used to ignoring it and distracting ourselves. When
we feel suffering, we have the urge to run away from it and fill ourselves
up with junk food, junk entertainment, anything to keep our mind
off the pain that is there inside us. It doesn’t work. We may succeed in
numbing ourselves from it for a little while, but the suffering inside
wants our attention and it will fester and churn away until it gets it.
     We run away from ourselves because we don’t want to be with
                                      25


                             no mud, no lotus
ourselves. Our pain is a kind of energy that is not pleasant. We fear
that if we release our diversions and come back to ourselves, we’ll be
overwhelmed by the suffering, despair, anger, and loneliness inside.
So we continue to run away. But if we don’t have the time and the will-
ingness to take care of ourselves, how can we offer any genuine care to
the people we love?
      That’s why the first practice is to stop running, come home to our
bodies, and recognize our suffering. When we notice anger or anxiety
coming up, we can recognize these feelings of suffering. Suffering is
one energy. Mindfulness is another energy that we can call on to come
and embrace the suffering. The practice of mindful breathing is essen-
tial, because it provides us with the energy we need for the other steps
of taking care of suffering.
      With mindful breathing, you can recognize the presence of a pain-
ful feeling, just like an older sibling greets a younger sibling. You can
say, “Hello, my suffering. I know you are there.” In this way, the energy
of mindfulness keeps us from being overwhelmed by painful feelings.
We can even smile to our suffering and say, “Good morning, my pain,
my sorrow, my fear. I see you. I am here. Don’t worry.”
               embracing suffering
If we let the suffering come up and just take over our mind, we can
be quickly overwhelmed by it. So we have to invite another energy to
come up at the same time, the energy of mindfulness. The function of
mindfulness is, first, to recognize the suffering and then to take care
of the suffering. The work of mindfulness is first to recognize the suf-
fering and second to embrace it. A mother taking care of a crying baby
                                     26


                               Say i n g H e l l o
naturally will take the child into her arms without suppressing, judg-
ing it, or ignoring the crying. Mindfulness is like that mother, recog-
nizing and embracing suffering without judgment.
      So the practice is not to fight or suppress the feeling, but rather
to cradle it with a lot of tenderness. When a mother embraces her
child, that energy of tenderness begins to penetrate into the body of
the child. Even if the mother doesn’t understand at first why the child
is suffering and she needs some time to find out what the difficulty
is, just her act of taking the child into her arms with tenderness can
already bring relief. If we can recognize and cradle the suffering while
we breathe mindfully, there is relief already.
      Embracing our suffering may seem to be the opposite of what we
want to do, especially if our suffering is very large, as with depression.
Depression is one of the most widespread forms of suffering in our
time. It can take away our peace, our joy, our stability, and even our
ability to eat, move about, or do simple tasks. It can seem insurmount-
able and we may think that the only thing we can do is either to run
away from it or give in to it.
      But nonjudgmentally recognizing and embracing this great suf-
fering is not at all the same thing as giving in to it. Once you have
offered your acknowledgment and care to this suffering, it naturally
will become less impenetrable and more workable; and then you have
the chance to look into it deeply, with kindness (but still always with
a solid ground of mindful breathing to support you), and find out why
it has come to you. It is trying to get your attention, to tell you some-
thing, and now you can take the opportunity to listen. You can ask
someone to look with you—a teacher, a friend, a psychotherapist.
Whether alone or together with your friends, you can explore what
kind of roots it has, and what nutriments and habits of consumption
                                      27


                             no mud, no lotus
have been feeding your sorrow. You can discover how, through looking
deeply, you can transform this organic “garbage” into compost, which
in turn may become many beautiful flowers of understanding, com-
passion, and joy.
                              the bell
Even with the best intention—and even with a longstanding mind-
fulness practice, we all have the tendency to run into the future or go
back into the past, to search for happiness elsewhere. A bell of mind-
fulness, whether it is an actual bell or some other sound, is a wonderful
reminder to come back to ourselves, to come back to life here in the
present moment.
     The sound of the bell is the voice of the Buddha within. Every
one of us has Buddha nature—the capacity for compassionate, clear,
understanding nature—within us. So when we hear the sound of the
bell, if we like practicing mindfulness, we can respond to that inter-
vention with respect and appreciation. In my tradition, every time we
hear the bell, we pause. We stop moving, talking, and thinking, and we
listen to the voice of the heart.
     We don’t say that we “hit the bell” or “strike the bell.” Rather,
we say we “invite the bell” to sound, because the bell is a friend, an
enlightened friend that helps us wake up and guides us home to our-
selves. Gentleness and nonviolence are characteristics of the sound of
the bell. Its sound is gentle but very powerful.
     When you hear the sound of the bell, take the opportunity to come
home to yourself and enjoy your breathing. Take a few moments to
inhale and exhale deeply and touch a little happiness. If you want to
                                    28


                              Say i n g H e l l o
experience what the end of suffering will feel like, it is in the here and
the now with this breath. If you want nirvana, it’s right here.
    Breathing in, I know I am breathing in.
    Breathing out, I smile.
                                     29




 H       aving embraced a child for some minutes, a caring, atten-
         tive parent often discovers the cause for his baby’s suffering.
Maybe the baby was hungry or had a little fever. The same is true with
our suffering. After we’ve cradled and embraced our suffering for
some time, we can look deeply into it and begin to understand what
has caused it and what has been feeding it. Understanding the nature
of the situation makes it much easier to transform it.
           u n d e r s ta n d i n g t h e pa i n
When we are in crisis or pain, we need to first take care of the imme-
diate need, which is that crisis. Once our mindful energy has soothed
our suffering, we can begin to look more deeply into its nature and
sources. Just as when we have a headache, acknowledging its exist-
ence and understanding its causes helps us find the appropriate rem-
edy for it, so understanding eases our pain and helps us transform it
into compassion.
     The important mindfulness practice of cultivating understand-
ing means first of all understanding suffering: the suffering inside us
and the suffering of others. A human being without understanding is a
human being without compassion, utterly alone, cut off, and isolated.
To connect with others, however, we first have to be willing to look
deeply into ourselves.


                               L o o k i n g D e e p ly
        t h e pa i n o f o u r a n c e s t o r s
Some of our ill-being comes from hurt and pain in our own life; but
some has been transmitted to us by our ancestors. Think of a stalk of
corn that grows from a seed. Each ear of corn, each leaf, contains that
initial seed. In every cell of the plant that seed is there. And just as the
plant of corn is the continuation of the seed of corn, you are the con-
tinuation of your parents.
     When you see a picture of yourself as a five-year-old child, you may
ask yourself, “Am I the same person as that child?” The answer isn’t
“Yes” or “No.” Your form, your feelings, your mental formations, your
perceptions, and your consciousness are quite different from when
you were that child. It’s clear you aren’t exactly that same person. But
if you say that you are a completely different person, that’s equally
wrong. You and that young child inter-are with each other.
     Before my mother gave birth to me, she had a miscarriage. The
child who didn’t arrive that time—was he my brother or was he me?
We aren’t the same, but we aren’t totally different. My feet have been
transmitted to me by my ancestors. When I walk, I walk with my own
feet, but these feet are also theirs. I can see the hand of my mother in
my hand. I can see the arms of my father in my arms. I am my parents
continuation.
     There are those who have lost their biological parents, or never
knew them, and have no chance to connect with them in person. There
are also people who grew up with their blood relatives, whose parents
are still alive, yet they are unable to communicate with them. In all
these situations, even if you don’t have a regular interpersonal rela-
tionship with your parents or your ancestors, your body and mind con-
tain their suffering and their hopes as well as your own.
                                         33


                             no mud, no lotus
     So if you have suffering in you and you don’t know where it comes
from, looking deeply you may see that this is the suffering of your
ancestors, handed down from one generation to another, because no
one knew how to recognize, embrace, and heal it. It’s not your fault,
nor is it their fault.
     Many people are angry at their parents because of the suffering
they experienced as children. They say, “That man, I don’t want any-
thing to do with him.” You may believe that your father is outside of
you, but your father is also inside of you. Your father is present in every
cell of your body. You can’t remove your father from you. It’s impossi-
ble. When he suffered, you suffered, and when you suffer, he suffers.
Getting angry with your father, you’re getting angry with yourself. The
suffering of the parent is the suffering of the child. Looking deeply is a
chance to transform and heal this suffering and stop the cycle.
     So part of looking deeply into our suffering is to know that it is
not ours alone. When we’re able to embrace our suffering, we’re also
embracing our ancestors, and the healing goes back through the gener-
ations. When we practice mindful breathing to know how to recognize,
embrace, and transform our pain, we do it for them as well as for us.
Then we can heal not only our own suffering and that of our ancestors,
but we can also avoid transmitting this suffering to our loved ones, to
our children, and their children.
                  exploring our fear
One unnecessary suffering that we can let go of is the suffering of
fear. So many of us walk around with the pain and agitation of useless
fear, whether that is the fear of dying, fear of hunger, injury or loss,
                                    34


                              L o o k i n g D e e p ly
fear of what might happen if we do the wrong thing, or fear of being
hurt by or of hurting someone we care about.
     Many people suffer due to the fear of dying. We want to live for-
ever. We fear annihilation. We don’t want to pass from being into non-
being. This is understandable. If you believe that one day you will cease
to exist altogether, it can be very scary. But if you take the time to still
the activities of body and mind and look deeply, you may see that you
are dying right this very moment. You think that you will die in a few
years, or twenty years, or thirty years. That’s not true. You are dying
now. You have been dying all the time. It’s actually very pleasant to die,
which is also to live.
     There are many cells inside your body that are dying as you read
these words. Fifty to seventy billion cells die each day in the average
human adult. You are too busy to organize funerals for all of them! At
the very same time, new cells are being born, and you don’t have the
time to sing Happy Birthday to them. If old cells don’t die, there’s
no chance for new cells to be born. So death is a very good thing. It’s
very crucial for birth. You are undergoing birth and death in this very
moment.
     While most people are intensely afraid of dying, there are also
people who are weary of living. They get bored after fifty, seventy, or
maybe only twenty or thirty years. They find life unbearable and are
seeking nonbeing. Some of them think that suicide is a way to end the
suffering and to pass from the realm of being into nonbeing. Both of
these preconceptions cause suffering because they ignore the reality
that life and death always go together. You can’t take one out of the
other. Even after your so-called death, you will continue in some way.
     Deep looking can dismantle these kinds of notions. There is no
birth and death; everything dies and renews itself all the time. When
                                        35


                            no mud, no lotus
you get that kind of insight, you no longer tire yourself out with anxiety
and aversion.
              y o u r t r u e a s p i r at i o n
When we are full of fear, we are often completely focused on prevent-
ing the event we dread, and we forget that joy is also possible even in
an unpredictable world. We believe that we need to obtain a certain
diploma or career in order to be safe and be a success. There are peo-
ple who are victims of this kind of success. They get the things they
worked so hard to achieve, and then they find themselves trapped in
ways they hadn’t anticipated. But no one is ever a victim of his or her
happiness.
     Many of us live in communities where everyone has a roof over
their head and enough food to eat, and no one is scared of bombs drop-
ping on them, yet people are still suffering. This is because we have
forgotten or misplaced our deepest aspiration.
     Many of us slog through life without conscious awareness or inten-
tion. We set ourselves a course and we barrel ahead, without stopping
to ask whether this path is fulfilling our most important goals. That’s
partly because many of us believe that happiness is not possible in
the here and now. We think we need to struggle now so that we will be
happy in the future. So we postpone happiness and try to run into the
future and attain the conditions of happiness that we don’t have now.
     If you breathe in and bring your mind home to your body, you
can recognize immediately the many conditions of happiness that
you already have. You can look deeply at your true aspiration and get
the insight, “I don’t need to run into the future in order to be happy.”
We all have the habit of running, every one of us. That habit creates
                                    36


                             L o o k i n g D e e p ly
tension, not only in the body but in the mind, and it’s a major source of
our suffering.
     Many of us believe that we can only be happy if we have a great
deal of power, fame, wealth, and sensual pleasures. But when we look
around we see there are people who have plenty of these things, yet
they aren’t happy. These objects of desire are not real conditions of
happiness. Looking deeply, we can recognize that habit energy of run-
ning and envision what things would be like if we didn’t let it push us
to run anymore.
     Everyone has volition, a strong motivation that fuels us and,
when it’s a healthy one, brings us joy. When I was twelve, I knew I
wanted to be a monk. At the age of sixteen, I left my mother and my
family to become ordained as a novice monk. I loved my mother so
much; I wanted to be near her. On the other hand, I knew my greatest
happiness would be to live as a monk. I had to sacrifice the good times
I would have spent with my mother and I was sad about it; but I didn’t
let any fear of loss hold me back, because I knew I was on the path of
fulfilling my true aspiration.
     If we haven’t taken the time to stop, come home to ourselves, and
look deeply, we may not know what brings us our deepest happiness.
Perhaps we are working hard at success in one area, but our deepest
aspiration is to work in another field or to help people in another way.
We need to stop and ask, “Can I realize my deepest aspiration if I pur-
sue this path?” “What is really preventing me from taking the path I
most deeply desire?”
                                       37


                            no mud, no lotus
        d e v e l o p i n g u n d e r s ta n d i n g
                   a n d c o m pa s s i o n
Just as the well-tended compost becomes a flower garden, when we
take care of and look deeply into our sorrow, it transforms into under-
standing and compassion.
     The way to understanding is first to listen to yourself, because
the roots of our suffering are deep and connected with the roots of the
suffering of others. Usually we think that other people, such as our
parents, our partner, or people at work, are to blame for our hurt. But
looking more deeply, we can see the true sources of our own suffering,
and we also can see that the person who we think is out to get us is a
victim of his or her own suffering. Understanding our own hurt allows
us to see and understand the suffering of others. Looking without
judgment, we can understand, and compassion is born. Transforma-
tion is possible.
     When you’re upset with someone, it may seem at first that this
other person has no reason to suffer. His life may seem happy and
carefree, and he may have all the things in his life that you think you
want. But when you are able to look deeply enough, you will see the suf-
fering in him.
     Sitting and walking mindfully, you direct your attention to the
causes underlying the other person’s behavior. You see clearly that
he has a lot of pain inside and doesn’t know how to handle it. That is
why he suffers so much and makes the people around him suffer. What
he needs is help, not punishment. If you stay with this practice, the
sufffering of anger or jealousy in you will dissipate and the flower of
compassion will be born.
     When there is no more blame or criticism in your eyes, when you
                                   38


                             L o o k i n g D e e p ly
are able to look at others with compassion, you see things very differ-
ently. You speak differently. The other person can sense you are truly
seeing her and understanding her, and that already eases her pain
significantly.
     Even a child can look deeply and see that his parents have diffi-
culties and don’t know how to handle their own pain. Their suffer-
ing overflows out onto the people around them, including—even
especially—the ones they love. An understanding of suffering helps
anger to be transformed. And when compassion is born in your heart,
you naturally want to reach out, to help others suffer less.
     Understanding and compassion are not for somebody else to cul-
tivate. They can heal you and increase your happiness. A human being
without understanding and compassion isn’t a happy being. Without
compassion and understanding, you are utterly alone and cut off. You
can’t relate to any other human being.
     I wouldn’t want to be in a world without any suffering, because
then there would be no compassion and understanding either. If you
haven’t suffered hunger, you can’t appreciate having something to eat.
If you haven’t gone through a war, you don’t know the value of peace.
That is why we should not try to run away from one unpleasant thing
after another. Holding our suffering, looking deeply into it, and trans-
forming it into compassion, we find a way to happiness.
     With mindfulness, the feelings that have been painful and diffi-
cult transform into something beautiful: the wondrous, healing balm
of understanding and compassion.
                                       39


                              no mud, no lotus
            e a s i n g c o m m u n i c at i o n
Our most basic difficulty is that sometimes we lack good communi-
cation inside ourselves. We don’t understand ourselves. In our body
there are conflicts and tensions, and we can’t resolve them. Instead
of stopping and looking deeply, we are running as far away as possible
from the loneliness, grief, sadness, anger, and emptiness that we feel
we can’t bear.
     If we’re in this situation and we find ourselves unable to communi-
cate well with others, that’s normal. They aren’t communicating with
themselves, and we aren’t communicating with ourselves, so is it any
wonder we have difficulty communicating with each other? The situ-
ation doesn’t call for blame or punishment; it calls for understanding
and compassion.
     With the practice of mindfulness, starting with our mindful
breathing, we recognize that suffering is there in us and suffering is
also there in the other person. We ourselves need help. The other per-
son also needs help. Nobody needs punishment. So when you get angry
and you suffer, don’t try to say or do something to punish the other per-
son, because there is a lot of suffering in her already, and punishing
her won’t improve the situation at all.
     The most effective way to show compassion to another is to listen,
rather than talk. You have an opportunity to practice deep, compas-
sionate listening. If you can listen to the other person with compas-
sion, your listening is like a salve for her wound. In the practice of
compassionate listening, you listen with only one purpose, which is to
give the other person the chance to speak out and to suffer less.
     This practice requires steady concentration and mindful breath-
ing in and out, to refrain from interrupting or attempting to correct
                                     40


                              L o o k i n g D e e p ly
what you hear. While the other person speaks, you may hear a lot of bit-
terness, wrong perception, and accusation in her speech. If you allow
these things to touch off the anger in you, you’ll lose your capacity to
listen deeply.
     Instead, hold on to your true purpose and remind yourself, “Lis-
tening like this, my sole aim is to help the other person to suffer less.
She may be full of wrong perceptions, but I won’t interrupt her. If I
jump in with my perspective on things or correct her, it will become a
debate, not a practice of deep listening. Another time, there may be a
chance for me to offer her a little information so that she can correct
her wrong perception. But not now.” That kind of mindfulness helps
you to keep your compassion alive and protects you from having the
seed of anger in you touched off. Who knows, you may be the first one
who has listened deeply to her like that.
     When you have understood her suffering and you are ready to
speak, your voice will contain compassion. You can use loving speech,
free of judgment or blame. You might say something such as, “It’s not
my intention to make you suffer. I didn’t understand your suffering.
I’m sorry. Please help me by telling me about your struggles and your
difficulties. I need help in understanding you.” Or you may be able to
say, “ I know you have suffered a lot during the past many years. I was
not able to help you to suffer less. Instead, I have made the situation
worse. I have reacted with anger and stubbornness, and instead of
helping you, I have made you suffer more. I am very sorry.” Many of us
are no longer able to use that kind of language with the other person
because we have suffered so much. But when we consciously practice
deep listening and loving speech, so much healing and happiness is
possible.
                                        41


                             no mud, no lotus
          being a mindfulness bell
                    for a loved one
If you have a loved one who suffers, you can be a compassionate ally
for him. You can offer to sit with him when he has to have a difficult
conversation with somebody, either in person or over the phone. Every
time the person he’s speaking with says something that you think
might trigger your loved one’s anger or sadness, you can squeeze your
loved one’s hand. That is your bell of mindfulness. Say to your loved
one ahead of time, “When you feel that squeeze, remember you don’t
have to say anything. Take it as a reminder to breathe in and out three
times slowly, paying attention to your breath. Try to smile. Maybe
the person you are talking with will be very surprised by your quality
of listening. Just breathe in and out three times, don’t say anything,
and try to smile.”
     Play the role of a bell of mindfulness. Your squeezing the hand is
like a bell, lovingly calling your friend to come back to himself. That
squeeze means, “I am here for you. You don’t need to do anything but
breathe.”
                                    42




S       ome of the situations and accidents that cause us the great-
        est suffering, when seen objectively, do not look very big. But
because we don’t know how to manage them, they feel enormous. If we
lose a loved one, that is of course a major loss. There is real pain there,
and we feel it mightily. But we also can spend days worrying that some-
one doesn’t like us, or that we didn’t say or do the right thing, or that
we won’t get the promotion we want. These are small sufferings, rela-
tively speaking, but we magnify them until they seem to take up all our
mindspace.
     If we know how to handle the little sufferings, we don’t have to suf-
fer on a daily basis. We can practice letting go of what the French call
les petites miseres, the little miseries, and save our energy to embrace
and soothe the true pains of illness and loss that are unavoidable.
               releasing the arrow
There is a Buddhist teaching found in the Sallatha Sutta, known as
The Arrow. It says if an arrow hits you, you will feel pain in that part of
your body where the arrow hit; and then if a second arrow comes and
strikes exactly at the same spot, the pain will not be only double, it will
become at least ten times more intense.
     The unwelcome things that sometimes happen in life—being
rejected, losing a valuable object, failing a test, getting injured in an
accident—are analogous to the first arrow. They cause some pain. The
second arrow, fired by our own selves, is our reaction, our storyline,
and our anxiety. All these things magnify the suffering. Many times,
the ultimate disaster we’re ruminating upon hasn’t even happened.
We may worry, for example, that we have cancer and that we’re going


                                     Ea s e
to die soon. We don’t know, and our fear of the unknown makes the
pain grow even bigger.
     The second arrow may take the form of judgment (“how could I
have been so stupid?”), fear (“what if the pain doesn’t go away?”), or
anger (“I hate that I’m in pain. I don’t deserve this!”). We can quickly
conjure up a hell realm of negativity in our minds that multiplies the
stress of the actual event, by ten times or even more. Part of the art
of suffering well is learning not to magnify our pain by getting carried
away in fear, anger, and despair. We build and maintain our energy
reserves to handle the big sufferings; the little sufferings we can let go.
     If you lose your job, of course it’s a normal response to feel fear
and anxiety. It is true that in most cases to be out of work is a suffer-
ing; and there is real danger attached if you don’t have enough to eat or
can’t afford necessary medicine. But you don’t need to make this suf-
fering worse by spinning stories in your head that are much worse than
the reality. Some people in this situation may think “I’m no good at
this or that,” or “I’ll never get another job,” or “I failed my family.” It’s
important to remember that everything is impermanent. A suffering
can arise—or can work itself out—for anyone at any moment.
     Instead of throwing good energy away on condemning yourself or
obsessing over what catastrophes might be lurking around the corner,
you can simply be present with the real suffering that is right in front
of you, with what is happening right now. Mindfulness is recognizing
what is there in the present moment. Suffering is there, yes; but what
is also there is that you are still alive: “Breathing in, I know I’m alive.”
Your eyes still work: “Breathing in, I’m aware of my eyes. Breathing
out, I smile to my eyes.”
     To have eyes in good condition is a wonderful thing. Because you
have eyes in good condition, there’s a paradise of shapes and colors
                                      47


                            no mud, no lotus
available to you at every moment. There are those among us who have
gone blind. They’ve lost that endlessly changing kaleidoscope of
shapes and colors; and what they want more than anything is to have
that faculty back again. You only need to open your eyes to be in touch
with that kaleidoscope. It’s a paradise, if you only stop to notice and
appreciate it. If you have eyes in good condition, just open them and
enjoy what you see. Happiness is possible immediately—even if not
everything is perfect.
     When you look at the person you love, if he or she is absorbed in
anxiety, you can help that person to get out. “Darling, do you see the
sunset? Do you see the spring coming?” This is mindfulness. Mind-
fulness is for making us aware of what is happening now. Not only are
there always conditions of happiness present in me, but they are also
all around me.
           complexes and the sense
                  o f a s e pa r at e s e l f
Most of the second arrows with which we shoot ourselves come from
our beliefs. One basic problem that causes us to suffer is the idea that
we are a separate self. This gives rise to the complexes of inferiority,
superiority, and equality. As long as we have the idea of a self, we try to
protect this self by running away from all kinds of threats and discom-
forts. If there is some loneliness, some anger, or some fear, we don’t
like it and we try to pretend that the suffering is not there. “It’s noth-
ing,” we say, nervously trying to sweep all the feelings under the rug.
     We create unnecessary pain when our reaction to an unpleasant
event is to compare our self with other selves, reinforcing our illusion
                                   48


                                      Ea s e
of separateness. We may feel a fleeting satisfaction when we tell our-
selves, “I am better than he is. I don’t care what he says.” That’s the
complex of superiority. Or we may try to immunize ourselves from dis-
appointment by thinking, “I’ll never be as good as she is. There’s no
point in trying.” That’s the complex of inferiority. Most people think
the best way to deal with these complexes is to maintain the belief, “I
am their equal.” But that is also a complex invented by the comparing
mind.
     Equality, when it refers to opportunity and access to resources, in
other words treating everyone’s needs and feelings with respect, is a
good thing. But the constant effort to prove one’s self equal to all others
brings only short-lived relief from the pain of discrimination—and,
ultimately, creates more suffering because it perpetuates our incorrect
belief in a separate self. If we think, “I claim the right to be as good as
he is,” there is still the idea of a separate self, and therefore there will
always be comparison. As long as you continue to compare, you suffer
from the fear of coming up short; and, even worse, you keep yourself
trapped in a constant, painful delusion of isolation and alienation.
      greener grass: the story of
              the buddha and mara
This story, about the Buddha meeting Mara, illustrates the problem
with complexes. In Buddhist stories, Mara is the personification of all
depravity and delusion, everything that makes us suffer in life.
      The Buddha was taking a solo retreat in a cave. His attendant and
student, the Venerable Ananda, would go out begging for alms, and
upon returning would divide his offerings into two, one part for him
                                       49


                             no mud, no lotus
and one for the Buddha. One morning as the Buddha was sitting inside
the cave in meditation, the Venerable Ananda, sitting outside of the
cave, saw someone approaching. Ananda had an inkling that this was
someone very familiar. It was Mara!
      Ananda wanted to hide somewhere, so that Mara, not seeing any-
one, would not approach the cave and disturb the Buddha. But it was
too late. Mara walked up to Ananda and asked, “Venerable Ananda, is
your teacher here?” Ananda wanted to lie and say, “No, the Buddha is
not here. The Buddha went to . . . ” some kind of meeting, conference,
or something! But lying is not appropriate for a monk, so he finally
said, “Why do you ask?”
      Mara said, “I want to visit the Buddha.” Ananda responded rather
scornfully, “Go away! You’re not a friend of the Buddha. You’re his
enemy. Don’t you remember how you tried to discourage the Buddha
from awakening under the Bodhi tree and the Buddha defeated you
terribly? The Buddha won’t see you.”
      When Mara heard that, he laughed, “Ha, ha, ha. Really? Your Bud-
dha has enemies? I thought he said he doesn’t have any enemies. Why
is it that he has an enemy now?”
      Ananda was dumbstuck. So he went into the cave to ask the Bud-
dha if he wanted to see Mara. Ananda was hoping the Buddha would
refuse. But when he heard who was waiting outside, the Buddha said,
“Mara? Let him in.” Ananda was really disappointed, but he was
obliged to go out and let Mara in.
      When Mara entered, the Buddha stood up and welcomed Mara as
if he were an old friend. He invited Mara to sit down in a distinguished
place and asked Ananda to bring tea and water for Mara to drink.
Ananda was really unhappy about it. He would be happy to get tea for
the Buddha two hundred times a day. But for Mara, Ananda didn’t
                                     50


                                   Ea s e
want to do it at all. But he went and got tea for Mara, hoping that Bud-
dha and Mara would have a short conversation. In fact, the conversa-
tion ended up being very long.
     Buddha and Mara spoke as if they were the best of friends. Buddha
said, “Mara, how has it been for you? How are you doing?” Mara said,
“Not very well.” “What happened?” the Buddha asked.
     Mara answered, “My disciples aren’t listening to me anymore.
They used to do everything I told them to, but nowadays they want
to rebel. All my generals, all my soldiers, all my disciples, they want to
practice mindfulness. They want to practice walking meditation. They
want to practice eating in silence. They want to protect the Earth. I
don’t know who got to them. Dear Buddha, I’m just so tired of being
Mara; I want to be someone else. Don’t think that being Mara is all wild
parties, fun, and games.”
     The Buddha laughed. “You think being a Buddha is such a lark?
Do you know that people say things that I have never said and then
they say it is I who said that? They do things that I have never done or
encouraged them to do, but they say that I encouraged them to do those
things.
     “I let go of my exalted reputation, my princely position, and an
endless availability of sensual pleasures. I abandoned my throne, my
beautiful wife and baby, future children, and wealth, all so that I could
realize liberation. But now people come to the temple to pray and plead
with me to give them all the very things I have renounced! They don’t
ask for peace or joy; they just ask for lots of money, power, or for their
children to have good grades on their exams.
     “They build a big house and they say it’s my house. But it’s only a
place where people come to pass by and offer food, bananas, sweet rice,
and money, so that they can have more money to spend on themselves.
                                    51


                             no mud, no lotus
They make statues of me and they stick all their money on my body.
When they celebrate my birthday, they put my statue up on top of a car
and they drive mindlessly through the city while my body rocks from
side to side. I didn’t ever want to be riding on a car. So don’t think that
being Buddha is lucky. Do you want to exchange places?”
     Ananda was terrified that Mara would agree, but luckily, he didn’t.
Then the Buddha said, “Mara, you do your job. Do your job the best you
can. I’ll do my job. Nothing is easy all the time. I know being Mara is
very difficult. But being a Buddha has its difficulties too. Each one of
us has to play our part wholeheartedly.”
     Every life has its trials and tribulations. We can navigate them
more skillfully when we don’t waste time and energy shooting our-
selves with a second arrow—such as dwelling on how much greener the
grass in our neighbor’s yard looks, compared to ours.
                                    52




W          e don’t have to wait for the end of all suffering before we can
           be happy. Happiness is available to us right here and right
now. But we may need to change our idea of happiness. Our idea of hap-
piness may itself be the main obstacle keeping us from true happiness.
     There are oysters living in the depths of the sea, and they don’t
have any eyes; they have never seen the blue sky or the stars. We have
eyes. We can see the beautiful sky above us, but we often don’t appre-
ciate what we have. Most of the time we just ignore it. There are more
conditions of happiness available than you and I can count, many more
than it takes to make us happy in the here and the now. If you’re able to
read a book, to read and understand these words, you are already much
luckier than many people.
            the difference between
                  joy and happiness
We can experience both joy and happiness, and Buddhist teachings do
make a distinction between the two. In joy, there is still some element
of excitement. Think of a person walking in the desert who has run out
of drinking water. If suddenly that person sees that there is an oasis
ahead—trees with beautiful shade and a lake of fresh water—he will
feel joy. When he arrives at the lake and actually cups the water and
drinks, this is happiness. You can experience both.
     The method here is simple. Breathing in, bring your mind home
to your body. Establish yourself in the here and the now and recognize
what is around you. Then joy and happiness arise easily, from your rec-
ognition of all the positive elements available right now.


                 Five Practices for nurturing happiness
                    why the buddha
                     k e p t m e d i tat i n g
When I was a young monk, I wondered why the Buddha kept practicing
mindfulness and meditation even after he had already become a Bud-
dha. Now I find the answer is plain enough to see. Happiness is imper-
manent, like everything else. In order for happiness to be extended
and renewed, you have to learn how to feed your happiness. Nothing
can survive without food, including happiness; your happiness can die
if you don’t know how to nourish it. If you cut a flower but you don’t put
it in some water, the flower will wilt in a few hours. Even if happiness
is already manifesting, we have to continue to nourish it. This is some-
times called conditioning, and it’s very important. We can condition
our bodies and minds to happiness with the five practices of letting go,
inviting positive seeds, mindfulness, concentration, and insight.
     the first practice: letting go
The first method of creating joy and happiness is to cast off, to leave
behind. There is a kind of joy that comes from letting go. Many of us
are bound to so many things. We believe these things are necessary
for our survival, our security, and our happiness. But many of these
things—or more precisely, our beliefs about their utter necessity—are
really obstacles for our joy and happiness.
     Sometimes you think that having a certain career, diploma, salary,
house, or partner is crucial for your happiness. You think you can’t go
on without it. Even when you have achieved that situation, or are with
that person, you continue to suffer. At the same time, you’re still afraid
                                   57


                               no mud, no lotus
that if you let go of that prize you’ve attained, it will be even worse; you
will be even more miserable without the object you are clinging to. You
can’t live with it, and you can’t live without it.
     If you come to look deeply into your fearful attachment, you will
realize that it is in fact the very obstacle to your joy and happiness. You
have the capacity to let it go. Letting go takes a lot of courage some-
times. But once you let go, happiness comes very quickly. You won’t
have to go around searching for it.
     Imagine you’re a city dweller taking a weekend trip out to the
countryside. If you live in a big metropolis, there’s a lot of noise, dust,
pollution, and odors, but also a lot of opportunities and excitement.
One day, a friend coaxes you into getting away for a couple of days.
At first you may say, “I can’t. I have too much work. I might miss an
important call.” But finally he convinces you to leave, and an hour or
two later, you find yourself in the countryside. You see open space. You
see the sky, and you feel the breeze on your cheeks. Happiness is born
from the fact that you could leave the city behind. If you hadn’t left,
how could you experience that kind of joy? You needed to let go.
              releasing your cows
One day the Buddha was sitting with some of his monks in the woods.
They had just come back from an almsround and were ready to share a
mindful lunch together. A farmer passed by, looking distraught.
     He asked the Buddha, “Monks, have you seen some cows going
by here?”
     “What cows?” the Buddha responded.
     “Well,” the man said. “I have four cows and I don’t know why, but
                                      58


                 Five Practices for nurturing happiness
this morning they all ran away. I also have two acres of sesame. This
year the insects ate the entire crop. I have lost everything: my har-
vest and my cows. I feel like killing myself.” The Buddha said, “Dear
friend, we have been sitting here almost an hour and we have not seen
any cows passing by. Maybe you should go and look in the other direc-
tion.” When the farmer was gone, the Buddha looked at his friends and
smiled knowingly. “Dear friends, you are very lucky,” he said. “You
don’t have any cows to lose.”
      I knew a rich woman living in New York City who purchased a
piece of land adjacent to her building. She wanted to build a huge
apartment complex on the land and then sell it so she could make a lot
of money. A friend came to visit her and stood looking out the window.
It had a beautiful view of the George Washington Bridge and a lot of
blue sky. The friend turned to the woman who had bought the land and
said, “Don’t build the apartment complex. If you do, you won’t have
this beautiful view anymore. Your neighbors won’t have a view any-
more. You’ll no longer see the blue sky and the river. You only need to
stand here and look and already you can have happiness. What is the
use of having more money and losing all that beauty and happiness?”
The woman was able to hear this and changed her plans for the build-
ing, releasing one big cow, thanks to the wise counsel of a friend.
     One of the biggest cows that we have is our narrow idea of happi-
ness. You may suffer just because of your idea; and you continue to suf-
fer until, one day, you are capable of releasing the idea and right away
you feel happy.
     A whole country can be caught in a single cow. A nation of hun-
dreds of millions may believe that such-and-such ideology is crucial for
the country to become a big power in the world, and that superpower
status is essential to the people’s happiness. So they invest everything
                                    59


                           no mud, no lotus
in that ideology, and insist it is the best way, the only way. Countries
can hold on to their cows for hundreds of years, and during that time
the people suffer a lot. Then finally one day, the country may be open
to change and discover that it actually works better and creates more
happiness when it’s run a different way. Every one of us has an idea of
happiness that can become too entrenched, too rigid. Every one of us
has cows to be released.
     Consider practicing to release your cows. Take a piece of paper
and write down the names of your cows, the things you think of as cru-
cial for your well-being. Perhaps this week you can start by releasing
just one, perhaps two. Or perhaps each one takes a year or more. The
more cows you release, the more joyful and happy you become.
              t h e s t o r y o f b a d h i ya
There is a story about a cousin of the Buddha whose name was
Badhiya. He was governor of a province in the kingdom of Shakya, in
present-day India. One day a number of his friends who were monks
and students of the Buddha came to him and invited him to join their
community. He hesitated. As a governor, he had at his command many
soldiers, a lot of money, and a very powerful position. But finally his
friends persuaded him. He left it all behind and came empty-handed
into the forest, where he was ordained by the Buddha as a monk. He
didn’t have a fancy house to live in anymore. He only had three robes,
one bowl, and a sitting mat.
     One night Badhiya was meditating at the foot of a tree. Suddenly
he uttered, the words, “Oh my happiness, oh my happiness.” It hap-
pened that another monk was sitting nearby. The other monk thought
                                    60


                 Five Practices for nurturing happiness
that Badhiya regretted having abandoned his position as governor. So
in the early morning that monk went to the Buddha and reported to
him, “Dear teacher, late last night I was sitting in meditation. Sud-
denly I heard the monk Badhiya exclaiming, ‘Oh my happiness, oh my
happiness.’ I think he has some problem.
     The Buddha sent his attendant to invite Badhiya to come. In front
of a group of monks the Buddha said, “Badhiya, is it true that last night
during sitting meditation you pronounced two times the sentence, ‘Oh
my happiness, oh my happiness’?” Badhiya said, “Yes, noble teacher, I
did pronounce that sentence twice.”
     “Could you explain to us why you have pronounced these three
words during the night?” the Buddha asked.
     Badhiya said, “Dear teacher, when I was a governor my palace was
guarded by hundreds of soldiers. But I was still very afraid. I was afraid
robbers would come and kill me or at least take away all my valuables.
So day and night I lived in fear. But last night I realized that now I have
nothing to lose. I was sitting out in the forest at the foot of a tree, and
never in my life have I felt so safe. Nobody wants to kill me anymore
because I have no power, no wealth, and no jewels for anyone to take. I
have nothing. Yet I finally have everything. I am touching such a great
happiness and freedom. That is why I have pronounced the words, ‘Oh
my happiness, oh my happiness.’ If I have disturbed someone, I am
sorry.”
              the second practice:
            inviting positive seeds
We each have many kinds of “seeds” lying deep in our consciousness.
                                    61


                            no mud, no lotus
Those we water are the ones that sprout, come up into our awareness,
and manifest outwardly. So in our own consciousness there is hell, and
there is also paradise. We are capable of being compassionate, under-
standing, and joyful. If we pay attention only to the negative things in
us, especially the suffering of past hurts, we are wallowing in our sor-
rows and not getting any positive nourishment. We can practice appro-
priate attention, watering the wholesome qualities in us by touching
the positive things that are always available inside and around us. That
is good food for our mind.
      One way of taking care of our suffering is to invite a seed of the
opposite nature to come up. As nothing exists without its opposite,
if you have a seed of arrogance, you have also a seed of compassion.
Every one of us has a seed of compassion. If you practice mindfulness
of compassion every day, the seed of compassion in you will become
strong. You need only concentrate on it and it will come up as a pow-
erful zone of energy. Naturally, when compassion comes up, arrogance
goes down. You don’t have to fight it or push it down. We can selec-
tively water the good seeds and refrain from watering the negative
seeds. This doesn’t mean we ignore our suffering; it just means that
we allow the positive seeds that are naturally there to get attention and
nourishment.
                 the third practice:
             mindfulness-based joy
Mindfulness helps us not only to get in touch with the suffering, so
that we can embrace and transform it, but also to touch the wonders of
life, including our own body. Then breathing in becomes a delight, and
                                   62


                 Five Practices for nurturing happiness
breathing out can also be a delight. You truly come to enjoy your breathing.
     A few years ago, I had a virus in my lungs that made them bleed. I
was spitting up blood. With lungs like that, it was difficult to breathe,
and it was difficult to be happy while breathing. After treatment, my
lungs healed and my breathing became much better. Now when I
breathe, all I need to do is to remember the time when my lungs were
infected with this virus. Then every breath I take becomes really deli-
cious, really good.
     When we practice mindful breathing or mindful walking, we
bring our mind home to our body and we are established in the here
and the now. We feel so lucky; we have so many conditions of happi-
ness that are already available. Joy and happiness come right away. So
mindfulness is a source of joy. Mindfulness is a source of happiness.
     Mindfulness is an energy you can generate all day long through
your practice. You can wash your dishes in mindfulness. You can cook
your dinner in mindfulness. You can mop the floor in mindfulness.
And with mindfulness you can touch the many conditions of happi-
ness and joy that are already available. You are a real artist. You know
how to create joy and happiness any time you want. This is the joy and
the happiness born from mindfulness.
                   enjoying sitting
Sitting meditation is also an opportunity to heal and to create
moments of joy. It’s not a time when you force yourself to sit there,
waiting for the bell announcing the end of the sitting. That would be
a waste. These are very rare, very precious moments of life, moments
you will never get back again. Many people in the world don’t have the
                                      63


                              no mud, no lotus
time to sit and do nothing like that. They consider it to be uneconomi-
cal or a luxury; they say, “time is money.” But we know that sitting can
be very healing, very profitable in its own way. So we have to learn how
to enjoy every moment of our sitting—how to breathe, how to sit, so
that every moment of our sitting can be nourishing and healing.
                  enjoying our steps
Many of us are in a perpetual hurry, and we don’t enjoy the steps we
make. Every time we stop and bring the mind back to our breath and
our step, we can produce a feeling of joy and peace, and get in touch
with the wonders of life. Our body is a wonder. Our body is like a flower;
it’s a wonder of life. There are so many wonders of life around us and
inside us that we’re unable to be in touch with because we’re always in a
hurry. We’re looking for something, maybe for some happiness. So we
miss the life all around us; we walk like zombies, staring down at our
smartphones or lost in our thoughts. We don’t enjoy our steps.
      In Plum Village, we practice walking meditation with the Sangha,
the community of practice. If someone were to ask, “What’s the pur-
pose of walking meditation? What’s the point? Why do you practice
it?” There are several answers we can give. But for me the best answer
is, “Because I like it.” I enjoy every step; every step makes me happy.
There’s no use in doing walking meditation if you don’t enjoy every
step you make. It would be a waste of time.
      It’s the same with sitting meditation. If someone asks, “What’s the
use of sitting and not doing anything?” The best answer is, “Because I
enjoy sitting.” If you can’t produce peace and joy in sitting meditation,
then it’s of no use. It wouldn’t help you even if you sat ten hours a day.
                                    64


                 Five Practices for nurturing happiness
We have to learn how to sit so that we can produce peace and joy during
the time of sitting. We have to learn how to walk so that we can enjoy
every step. Walking on the planet Earth is a very wonderful thing to
do. There are scientists who spend months out in space, far away from
Earth. When they come back to Earth, they’re so happy to take steps
on our planet again.
     This is about the quality of walking and sitting. We know that
mindfulness and concentration can bring a higher quality to our
steps, our breathing, and our sitting. Enlightenment is always enlight-
enment about something. You are aware that you are alive; that is
already enlightenment. You are aware that you have a body; that
is already enlightenment. You are aware that your feet are strong
enough for you to enjoy walking; that is also enlightenment.
     When you brush your teeth, you can choose to do it in mindful-
ness. You don’t think of other things. You just focus your attention on
brushing your teeth. You spend maybe two or three minutes brushing
your teeth. You can produce the energy of joy and happiness during
that time simply by being mindful of your teeth and of your brushing.
When you go to the toilet, defecating or urinating, it’s also possible to
enjoy that time. Mindfulness can change everything by helping you to
really be there and enjoy whatever you’re doing.
     Many of us have spent our lives pursuing material comforts and
affective comforts. We may find that we have succeeded—we have
enough money and we have someone who loves and understands
us; yet we’re not happy. Perhaps it’s because we aren’t practicing the
mindfulness that would help us recognize the many conditions of hap-
piness that are there.
                                    65


                              no mud, no lotus
      morning verse for happiness
When you wake up in the morning, the first thing to do is to breathe
and to become aware that you have twenty-four brand-new hours to
live. This is a gift of life.
     After I was ordained as a novice monk, I had to memorize many
short verses to help me practice mindfulness.
The first verse is:
     Waking up this morning I smile.
     I have twenty-four hours to live.
     I vow to live them deeply
     and learn to look at the beings around me
       with the eyes of compassion.
There are four lines. The first line is for your in-breath. The second line
is for your out-breath. The third line is for your in-breath again. The
fourth line is for your out-breath. As you breathe, you use the verse to
focus your attention on the meaning of the words. You want to live the
twenty-four hours that are given you in such a way that peace, joy, and
happiness are possible. You’re determined not to waste your twenty-
four hours, because you know those twenty-four hours are a gift of life,
and you receive that gift every morning. That is mindfulness.
     There are more than fifty such verses that a new monk or nun has
to memorize and practice throughout the day. When she brushes her
teeth, she silently recites a verse. When he urinates, there is a verse to
practice. When she puts on her robe, there is another verse for that.
The practice of mindfulness means to be aware of everything you
                                     66


                  Five Practices for nurturing happiness
do in your daily life—to live more deeply every moment that is given
you to live, so you won’t waste your time and waste your life.
                  c r e at i n g h a p p i n e s s
We know how to nourish happiness with mindfulness. We get in touch
with the wonderful elements of life in us and around us. We don’t need
to run around. We don’t have to go looking into the future. The condi-
tions are already there. With mindfulness we can discover the fact that
the conditions of happiness we already have are sufficient, really much
more than sufficient, and happiness is possible right now. When you
walk, it can be a celebration. When you breathe with awareness, it’s to
celebrate. When we sit like that, we are celebrating; we’re celebrating
life.
      Just as we may have many small sorrows that mindfulness can help
us release, we also have a multitude of small moments of happiness that
we can savor and extend. Whether you drink a cup of tea or take a walk
or just sit down and look, you can create happiness during that time.
People complain that they don’t have any happiness in life. We need to
find the many small joys that life has to offer and help them grow.
      There are many talented people with diplomas, degrees, and long
titles. There are people who can invent revolutionary new machines
and computer applications. We may like to ask them, “Can you cre-
ate a moment of happiness?” If you know how to do this, you can
create something truly beneficial.
      To make a soup we need some water, some vegetables, some tofu,
a little of this and a little of that. You can make a good soup with just
a few simple ingredients; nothing fancy is needed. A small portion
                                      67


                             no mud, no lotus
of happiness is a kind of soup. With a few ingredients, an open mind,
and a little resourcefulness, we can make a moment of happiness for
ourselves and for the person next to us. We can offer some of our tasty
soup to someone else. If we know how to create a moment of happiness,
we get to enjoy that happiness ourselves, and we can also double it by
sharing it with another person. That is the art of happiness, tasting
and delighting in the little happinesses of daily life.
     I suggest you take a piece of a paper and write down all the con-
ditions for happiness available to you right now. One page may not be
enough. Two pages may not be enough. Three or four pages may not
be enough. When we recognize all these elements, it’s so easy to gener-
ate happiness.
               the fourth practice:
                     c o n c e n t r at i o n
Concentration is born from mindfulness. Concentration has the
power to break through, to burn away the afflictions that make you suf-
fer and to allow joy and happiness to come in.
     To stay in the present moment takes concentration. Worries and
anxiety about the future are always there, ready to take us away. We
can see them, acknowledge them, and use our concentration to return
to the present moment.
     When we have concentration, we have a lot of energy. We won’t
get carried away by visions of past suffering or fears about the future.
We dwell stably in the present moment so we can get in touch with the
wonders of life, and generate joy and happiness.
     Concentration is always concentration on something. If you focus
                                   68


                  Five Practices for nurturing happiness
on your breathing in a relaxed way, you are already cultivating an inner
strength. When you come back to feel your breath, concentrate on your
breathing with all your heart and mind. Concentration is not hard
labor. You don’t have to strain yourself or make a huge effort. Happi-
ness arises lightly and easily.
         the fifth practice: insight
With mindfulness, we recognize the tension in our body, and we want
very much to release it, but sometimes we can’t. What we need is some
insight.
      Insight is seeing what is there. It is the clarity that can liberate us
from afflictions such as jealousy or anger, and allow true happiness to
come. Every one of us has insight, though we don’t always make use of
it to increase our happiness.
      We may know, for example, that something (a craving, or a grudge)
is an obstacle for our happiness, that it brings us anxiety and fear. We
know this thing is not worth the sleep we’re losing over it. But still we
go on spending our time and energy obsessing about it. We’re like a
fish who has been caught once before and knows there’s a hook inside
the bait; if the fish makes use of that insight, he won’t bite, because he
knows he’ll get caught by the hook.
      Often, we just bite onto our craving or grudge, and let the hook
take us. We get caught and attached to these situations that are not
worthy of our concern. If mindfulness and concentration are there,
then insight will be there and we can make use of it to swim away, free.
      In springtime when there is a lot of pollen in the air, some of us
have a hard time breathing due to allergies. Even when we aren’t trying
                                    69


                            no mud, no lotus
to run five miles and we just want to sit or lie down, we can’t breathe very
well. So in wintertime, when there’s no pollen, instead of complain-
ing about the cold, we can remember how in April or May we couldn’t
go out at all. Now our lungs are clear, we can take a brisk walk outside
and we can breathe very well. We consciously call up our experience
of the past to help ourselves treasure the good things we are having
right now.
     In the past we probably did suffer from one thing or another. It
may even have felt like a kind of hell. If we remember that suffering,
not letting ourselves get carried away by it, we can use it to remind our-
selves, “How lucky I am right now. I’m not in that situation. I can be
happy.”—that is insight; and in that moment, our joy, and our happi-
ness can grow very quickly.
                                    70




W           e’ve seen that our suffering is connected with the suffering
            of our ancestors, our loved ones, and with the planet itself,
so we know our happiness is not an individual matter. If we are able to
breathe happily, we can invite our ancestors to enjoy breathing in with
our lungs. If we are able to enjoy walking, we can invite our ancestors to
walk with our feet.
      When a young person tells his parents, “This is my body; this is my
life. I can do what I want with it” he is only partly right. He doesn’t see
that he is the continuation of his parents and of his ancestors before
that. This body is not yours alone. It is also the body of your ancestors.
Your body is a collective product of your nation, of your people, of your
culture, of your ancestors. So you are not strictly an individual. You are
partly collective.
      There are many people who have enormous suffering, overwhelm-
ing suffering, and they don’t know how to end this suffering. For many
people, this suffering starts at a very young age. So why don’t schools
teach us how to manage suffering? If your suffering is so great, you
can’t concentrate, you can’t study, and you can’t focus. The suffering of
each of us affects others. The more we can teach each other about the
art of suffering well, the less suffering there will be in the world overall
and the more happiness.
            borrowing mindfulness
There are times when a case of suffering is so great, it needs recog-
nition from more than just one person. We all need help sometimes
when suffering threatens to overwhelm us. We can borrow the col-
lective energy of mindfulness of a group of practitioners, in order to


                  h a p p i n e s s i s n o t a n i n d i v i d u a l m at t e r
recognize and embrace the block of suffering in us. When suffering
has become a seemingly impenetrable obstacle, we can learn how to
draw on the support of others.
     If we can take the time to sit together and allow the collective
energy of mindfulness to recognize and embrace our pain, we become
a drop of water flowing in the river of awakened energy and we feel
much better. We may not have to do or even say anything. We just
allow our pain to be embraced by the collective energy of mindfulness.
Sometimes we may have to reach out more directly and ask for help.
That can be very difficult. But other people do want to help, if we only
ask them.
     If we have loved ones who are suffering, one of the best things that
we can do is to offer to sit or walk with them, and offer them our energy
of mindfulness and peace. It can help calm them down and embrace
their suffering, so that they can walk, sit, and breathe in mindfulness,
and take care of the crying baby inside them.
                     being there for
                a n o t h e r’ s s o r r o w s
When you love someone, you want to offer her something that can
make her happy. According to this practice, the most precious thing
that you can offer your beloved is your presence.
     How can you love if you are not there? In order to love, you have
to be there. To be there is a practice. It could be that very often your
body is there but your mind is elsewhere. You’re lost in your thinking,
your sorrow, your fear; you’re not really there for her. So breathe in and
focus your attention on your in-breath. You are bringing your mind
                                              75


                             no mud, no lotus
home to your body and you become present. Simply to be there is the
most important part of the practice.
     When you are truly there, you can go to the person you love, look
into her eyes and say to her, “I am here for you.” The most precious
thing you can offer the person you love is your presence. It’s not some-
thing you can buy in the supermarket.
              collective suffering,
                      collective joy
When people come together and produce the energy of mindfulness,
concentration, and compassion, it gives rise to a wholesome kind of
collective consciousness. This is a good thing to consume. At one talk
I gave in Germany, there were a thousand people listening peacefully,
including four young mothers who were breast-feeding their babies.
The infants were consuming the milk from their mothers and they
were also consuming the collective energy of peace.
     When the September 11, 2001, attacks happened, I was in Califor-
nia, about to give a public talk. Of course the whole American nation
was shaken by the news. The energy of anger and fear was tremendous
and I could feel it. It’s very dangerous if we unconsciously allow that
kind of energy to penetrate and to harm us.
     So the talk I gave that night was about calming strong emotions.
When a whole community is afraid or angry, their energy is very strong
which can create a desire to strike back right away. But action pushed
by the collective energy of anger and fear is not usually right action.
We can start a devastating war very easily.
                                   76


                  h a p p i n e s s i s n o t a n i n d i v i d u a l m at t e r
          ta k i n g r e f u g e i n o n e s e l f
When people around you are practicing compassion, they’ll be wiser
and happier, not only individually but also as a group. Combining our
experiences and insights leads to a collective insight that can be wiser
than the sum of its parts.
     Without a community, it’s harder for a person to change anything.
If you work in a hospital or a clinic, or anyplace where you have to prac-
tice compassion with people in crisis on a daily basis, you know that
having colleagues who support you in that practice creates a much
more healing effect. A good environment allows the best things in us
to manifest. A toxic environment can bring out the worst things in us.
     Everyone needs a mindful community for support. We can join
together to create a healing environment wherever we are. Our fam-
ily, our classroom, and our workplace can all be mindful communi-
ties. When we come together and enjoy practicing mindful breathing
together, we produce a collective energy of mindfulness and compas-
sion that is wholesome and very strong. In our daily lives, many of us
are in toxic environments of mutually reinforcing suspicion, compe-
tition, greed, and jealousy. We consume our environment as a kind of
food, and its good or harmful elements seep into us.
     You may find yourself in a negative environment you can’t get out
of due to the realities of family needs or financial constraints. In that
case, you can be a force for positive change. Start by creating your own
safe harbor, even if it’s only one corner of a room or a desk. There are
also wholesome communities online that you can join. Don’t give up
hope.
     You can live in such a way that shows compassion is possible in
any situation. Set an example, even if it’s a small one; other people can
                                              77


                             no mud, no lotus
learn from it. The best way to help others lessen their fear, craving,
and violence is to show them there is another way. If love has degener-
ated into hate, it’s possible for you to turn the garbage of that hate into
a kind of compost to nourish the flower of love to bloom again.
                   collective action
When a group comes together and commits to practicing mindfulness
together—breathing together, walking together, doing some kind of
good work together to lessen the suffering in the world—this is pos-
itive, collective action that can be very powerful. In the collective
action, you can see the individual aspect. There are those who sit dif-
ferently than others. There are some who focus more easily, some who
need more support. In the collective we can see the individual, and in
the individual there is the collective. There is no absolute individual-
ity; there is no absolute collectivity.
      Anything you can do to lessen suffering in your community and
in the world is known in Buddhism as Right Action. When you go to
the supermarket, you can make the choice whether to practice Right
Action or not. There are items for sale that have been produced by
children who have no chance to go to school. There are items that have
been made with materials that can be harmful. We are part of the col-
lective whole, and even these individual decisions about what to con-
sume affect the collective consciousness.
      I remember one day I went with some children to a hardware store.
We visited all the items in the store. We only needed a few nails for a
project, and we agreed with each other in advance that we wouldn’t buy
anything else. We spent over an hour in the store, learning about the
                                     78


                  h a p p i n e s s i s n o t a n i n d i v i d u a l m at t e r
origin and the effect of each item sold and not buying anything but a
handful of nails. We did that as a special group activity. You don’t have
to spend an hour every time you want to buy one item; but you can feel
much happier when you know the things in your home are not infused
with the pain of child laborers or a poisoned field.
                   the whole world
                     is our territory
We may think we are only responsible for our own suffering and hap-
piness, but our happiness increases the world’s happiness and our
suffering is the world’s suffering. In Vietnam, there is a Buddhist folk-
tale about Mara, the personification of distraction, attachment, and
despair—the devilish character that Ananda tried to keep away from
the Buddha’s cave.
     They say that before the Buddha’s enlightenment, when the world
was under the reign of Mara, there was a lot of war and violence. Peo-
ple suffered enormously. But they reminded themselves, “If there’s
Mara, there is the Buddha. We don’t need to worry. The Buddha will
appear eventually.”
     On the day the Buddha became enlightened, he sat very quietly.
Mara said, “Who is this guy sitting so quietly?” Mara didn’t disturb the
Buddha; he just allowed the Buddha to sit. After sitting in meditation,
the Buddha stood up and walked mindfully, freely, and peacefully.
Mara asked, “Who are you? Why are you here?”
     The Buddha said, “I see that this Earth is a beautiful place; the
scenery is lovely. The early morning is beautiful. The afternoon and
the evening are beautiful. I see these wonders and it makes me so
                                              79


                              no mud, no lotus
happy. I don’t need to have any possessions or wealth. I don’t need any-
thing. All I need is the opportunity to sit still and to be able to walk on
this beautiful planet.”
      Mara thought that this wasn’t a bad request. “Okay, you can sit as
much as you want, walk as much as you want,” he said.
      A few days later, the Buddha asked, “I have a few friends. Actually
I have 1,250 friends, and they all want to sit; they all want to walk in
mindfulness. Can we have an area here to sit and walk mindfully and
peacefully?” Mara said, “Sure, if you sit and walk, that’s fine. How
much space do you want to have for practicing sitting meditation and
walking meditation?”
      Back then they didn’t have fancy measuring devices. The Buddha
said, “I have three robes. If you agree, I’ll take off my outer robe and
I’ll throw it up in the sky as high as I can. The shadow cast on the Earth
by my robe is the land I want to have for sitting, walking, and living
mindfully.”
       Mara said, “Well the most it could be is just a few miles. Okay.”
The Buddha rolled up his robe and threw it up in the sky. The robe went
high, high, high up. Then it opened, and the shadow of the robe cov-
ered the whole planet.
       From then on, the Buddha and his students walked all over the
Earth, practicing compassion and mindfulness and helping people
suffer less. We all have the right to do the same on this planet, lessen-
ing suffering and increasing happiness. This Earth is not just the ter-
ritory of Mara, but also the territory of the Buddha.
                                     80


                  h a p p i n e s s i s n o t a n i n d i v i d u a l m at t e r
               the art of happiness
The essence of our practice can be described as transforming suffer-
ing into happiness. It’s not a complicated practice, but it requires us to
cultivate mindfulness, concentration, and insight. It requires first of
all that we come home to ourselves, that we make peace with our suf-
fering, treating it tenderly, and looking deeply at the roots of our pain.
It requires that we let go of useless, unnecessary sufferings, release the
second arrow, and take a closer look at our idea of happiness. Finally,
it requires that we nourish happiness daily, with acknowledgment,
understanding, and compassion for ourselves and for those around
us. We offer these practices to ourselves, to our loved ones, and to the
larger community. This is the art of suffering and the art of happiness.
With each breath, we ease suffering and generate joy. With each step,
the flower of insight blooms.
                                              81




                            no mud, no lotus
                   one: the sixteen
               b r e at h i n g e x e r c i s e s
These exercises are taken from the Anapanasati Sutra on mindful
breathing. There are sixteen exercises in all. The first four are to take
care of our body. The second set of four exercises takes care of our
feelings. The third set of four focuses on the mind, and the fourth set
focuses on objects of the mind.
     Although the first set of exercises is primarily for taking care of
and healing the body, when you do them you also produce pleasure,
freedom, and joy in your mind at the same time, because the body is
always manifesting together with feelings and the mind.
     The mind can be described as being made up of particles—like
the drops of water in a river—called mental formations. Each drop
of water in the river of the mind is a mental formation. Mindfulness,
concentration, loving kindness, and insight are all mental formations.
     The fourth set focuses on objects of mind because mental forma-
tions always have their objects. To be angry is always to be angry at
something. To love means to love someone or something.
                                   84


                           practices for happiness
 BRE ATHING EXERCISE / SET 1                       DESCRIPTION
Breathing in,                          This very simple exercise can help
I am aware of my in-breath.            you to let go of your thinking, your
Breathing out,                         worries, and your fear. It gives you a
I am aware of my out-breath.           lot of freedom right away.
Breathing in, I follow my              Follow your in-breath and out-
in-breath all the way through.         breath closely, being aware of
Breathing out, I follow my             each one all the way through as if
out-breath all the way through.        following a line with your finger.
                                       Breathing like that, not only are you
                                       aware of your breath, you are fully
                                       concentrating on that breath.
Breathing in, I am aware of my         This exercise brings body and mind
whole body.                            together. We are truly established
Breathing out, I am aware of my        in the here and now, living our life
whole body.                            deeply in this moment.
Breathing in, I calm my body.          This exercise is to release the
Breathing out, I calm my body.         tension in the body. Releasing is a
                                       source of happiness.
 BRE ATHING EXERCISE / SET 2                       DESCRIPTION
Breathing in, I feel joy.              We can make use of mindfulness to
Breathing out, I feel joy.             bring in a feeling of joy any place,
                                       any time.
Breathing in, I feel happy.            Mindfulness helps us to recognize
Breathing out, I feel happy.           the many conditions of happiness
                                       we already have.
Breathing in, I am aware of a          When a painful feeling or emotion
painful feeling.                       manifests, we should be there to
Breathing out, I am aware of a         take care of it. With mindfulness,
painful feeling.                       we recognize the pain, embrace it,
                                       and bring relief.
Breathing in, I calm my                This exercise calms body and mind,
painful feeling.                       and makes them peaceful. Body,
Breathing out, I calm my               mind, feelings, and breath are
painful feeling.                       unified.
                                     85


                            no mud, no lotus
 BREATHING EXERCISE / SET 3                     DESCRIPTION
Breathing in, I am aware of          The river of mind flows day and
my mind.                             night. Mental formations take
Breathing out, I am aware of         turns manifesting. We are there
my mind.                             and recognize them as they arise,
                                     stay for some time, and go away.
Breathing in, I make my              We gladden the mind by inviting
mind happy.                          the good seeds to manifest. The
Breathing out, I make my             landscape of the mind becomes
mind happy.                          pleasant.
Breathing in, I concentrate          We maintain awareness on the
my mind.                             object of our concentration. Only
Breathing out, I concentrate         concentration can liberate us from
my mind.                             notions and bring insight.
Breathing in, I liberate my mind.    With this exercise, we untie all
Breathing out, I liberate my mind.   the knots in the mind. Calmly,
                                     we observe the mind in all its
                                     subtlety, to free ourselves from such
                                     obstacles as sadness and anxiety
                                     about the past and the future, and
                                     confusion and misperception in the
                                     present.
                                   86


                         practices for happiness
 BRE ATHING EXERCISE / SET 4                      DESCRIPTION
Breathing in, I observe the            The concentration on
impermanent nature of                  impermanence is a deep and
all dharmas.                           wonderful path of meditation. It’s
Breathing out, I observe the           a fundamental recognition of the
impermanent nature of                  nature of all that exists. Everything
all dharmas.                           is in endless transformation and all
                                       things are without an independent
                                       self.
Breathing in, I observe the            Seeing the true nature of our
disappearance of desire.               desire and the objects of desire, we
Breathing out, I observe the           know that happiness doesn’t lie in
disappearance of desire.               attaining those objects or in our
                                       hopes for future accomplishments.
                                       We observe clearly the imperm-
                                       anent nature of all things, their
                                       coming into being and fading away.
Breathing in, I observe cessation.     Cessation means cessation of all the
Breathing out, I observe cessation.    erroneous notions and ideas that
                                       keep us from directly experiencing
                                       the ultimate reality, and cessation
                                       of the suffering that’s born from
                                       ignorance. Then we can be in touch
                                       with the wonderful true nature of
                                       the way things are.
Breathing in, I observe letting go.    This exercise helps us look deeply to
Breathing out, I observe letting go.   give up desire and attachment, fear
                                       and anger. We don’t let go of reality.
                                       We let go of our wrong perceptions
                                       about reality. The more we let go,
                                       the happier we become.
                                     87


                            no mud, no lotus
                 the first set of four exercises
The first exercise is mindfulness of our breathing. “Breathing in,
I know I’m breathing in. Breathing out, I know I’m breathing out.”
Bringing our awareness to our breathing, we stop all the thinking and
focus only on our in-breath and out-breath.
     The second exercise is “Breathing in, I follow my in-breath all the
way through. Breathing out, I follow my out-breath all the way through.
This exercise focuses and concentrates the mind. We follow our
in-breath and out-breath from beginning to end without interruption.
     The third exercise is “Breathing in, I’m aware of my body. Breath-
ing out, I’m aware of my body.” With this exercise we remember we
have a body and we bring our awareness to our body, reuniting body
and mind. As you breathe in and out, becoming aware of your body,
you may notice tension and pain in your body. You have allowed ten-
sion and strain to accumulate in your body, and that may be the start-
ing place for any number of illnesses. That’s why you’re motivated to
release these tensions; and it’s further applied in the fourth exercise
of mindful breathing: “Breathing in, I release the tension in my body.
Breathing out, I release the tension in my body.” Or: “Breathing in,
I calm my body. Breathing out, I calm my body.” We may need some
insight that can help us release the tension and calm the body.
               the second set of four exercises
With the fifth exercise you go from the realm of the body to the realm
of feeling and you generate joy. “Breathing in, I’m aware of the feel-
ing of joy.” A mindfulness practitioner is able to generate joy and
happiness. It’s not so hard. There’s a little difference between joy
and happiness. Joy still has some of the element of excitement or
                                   88


                          practices for happiness
anticipation in it. In happiness, there is ease and freedom.
     The French have a song they like to sing, “Qu’est-ce qu’on attend
pour être heureux?” (What are you waiting for in order to be happy?)
You can be happy right here and right now. When you bring your mind
home to your body, you’re established in the present moment, and you
become aware of the many wonders of life that are there, in and around
you. With so many conditions of happiness available, you can easily
create a feeling of joy, a feeling of happiness. Each exercise makes the
next one possible.
     So the fifth and the sixth exercises represent the art of happiness—
how to generate joy and happiness for the sake of your enjoyment and
your healing. The next two exercises are to recognize and take care of
the pain that is there.
     The seventh is “Breathing in, I’m aware of the painful feeling in
me.” When a painful feeling arises, the practitioner knows how to use
mindfulness to handle it. You don’t allow the painful feeling to over-
whelm you or push you to react in a way that creates suffering for your-
self and for others.
     “Breathing in, I’m aware of the painful feeling in me. Breathing
out, I’m aware of the painful feeling in me.” This is an art. We have to
learn it, because most of us don’t like to be with our pain. We’re afraid
of being overwhelmed by the pain, so we always seek to run away from
it. There’s loneliness, fear, anger, and despair in us. Mostly we try to
cover it up by consuming. There are those of us who go and look for
something to eat. Others turn on the television. In fact, many people
do both at the same time. And even if the TV program isn’t interest-
ing at all, we don’t have the courage to turn it off, because if we turn
it off, we have to go back to ourselves and encounter the pain inside.
The marketplace provides us with many items to help us in our effort
                                     89


                            no mud, no lotus
to avoid the suffering inside.
     According to this teaching and practice, we do the opposite: we go
home to ourselves and take care of the pain. The way to go home with-
out fear of being overwhelmed by the pain is by practicing mindful
walking or mindful breathing to generate the energy of mindfulness.
Fortified with that energy, we recognize the painful feeling inside and
embrace it tenderly. We lullaby the crying baby. Just as the third exer-
cise is “aware of the body” and the fourth is “calming the body,” the
seventh exercise is to be aware of the painful feeling and the eighth is
to embrace, calm, and soothe the pain. All of the first eight exercises
are simple, and are easy enough for us to practice in daily life.
                 the third set of four exercises
The ninth exercise is: “Breathing in, I am aware of the activities of my
mind. Breathing out, I’m aware of the activities of my mind.” We con-
tinue to breathe mindfully and we recognize mental formations when
they arise. And we can call them by their true names, such as “anger”
or “joy.”
     The tenth is to “gladden the mind—to get in touch with the whole-
some seeds that are there in the soil of our mind and water them, so
that they can manifest as mental formations or zones of energy that
make us happy. We do this for our own benefit and for the benefit of our
loved ones.
     The eleventh exercise is “concentrating our mind.” And the twelfth
is “liberating the mind.” Concentration, samadhi in Sanskrit, is a
powerful force that you can generate to make a breakthrough, to see
clearly what is there and understand its true nature. The object can be
a pebble, a leaf, a cloud, or it can be your anger or fear. Anything can
                                    90


                         practices for happiness
be the object of your concentration. I think scientists also practice
concentration. In order to realize a deeper understanding of something,
they have to concentrate totally on it. But the practice of concentration,
as we are using it here, has the very specific aim and purpose of trans-
forming the afflictions in us—the fear, the anger, the illusion—so that
we can be free.
                 the final set of four exercises
The thirteenth exercise is the concentration on impermanence. With
the insight of impermanence, we see the interdependent and selfless
nature of all that exists—that nothing has a separate, independent self.
     With the fourtheenth exercise, we recognize the true nature of
desire and see that everything is already in the process of coming into
being and disintegrating. With this insight, we no longer hold on to any
object of desire or see any phenomenon as a changeless separate entity.
     With the fifteenth exercise, we look into the nature of our ideas
and notions and release them. When we’re no longer grasping at
notions, we experience the freedom and joy that comes from the ces-
sation of illusion.
     The sixteenth exercise helps us further shed light on desire and
attachment, fear and anxiety, hatred and anger, and let them go. Our
tendency is to think that if we let go, we’ll lose the things that make
us happy. But the opposite is true. The more we let go, the happier we
become. Letting go doesn’t mean we let go of everything. We don’t let
go of reality. But we let go of our wrong ideas and wrong perceptions
about reality.
                                    91


                              no mud, no lotus
              two: the six mantras
The Six Mantras are ways to express love and compassion. They can be
very effective in transforming suffering and producing happiness in
a relationship with a loved one, a friend, or a colleague. Children can
practice them too. You may start by first practicing the Six Mantras
with yourself, because you can only love and understand another when
you have practiced love and understanding for yourself.
     A mantra is a magic formula. Every time you pronounce a man-
tra you can transform the situation right away; you don’t have to wait.
Learn it so you can recite it when the time is appropriate. What makes
the mantra effective is your mindfulness and concentration. If you
aren’t mindful and concentrated when you recite the mantra, it won’t
work. We are all capable of being mindful and concentrated.
              MANTR A                             DESCRIPTION
 I am here for you.                    This mantra is a practice, not a
                                       declaration. To love someone means
                                       to be there for that person. But first
                                       you have to be there for yourself.
                                       The practice is to produce your true
                                       presence.
 I know you are there, and it makes    This mantra is to acknowledge the
 me very happy.                        presence of the person you love and
                                       to say that you are very happy that
                                       he or she is still alive and available
                                       to you. Everyone wants to be
                                       embraced by the mindful attention
                                       of the one they love. This mantra
                                       will make the other person happy
                                       right away.
                                    92


                         practices for happiness
               MANTR A                             DESCRIPTION
I know you suffer, and that is why I   This mantra is for you to practice
am here for you.                       when you see that the other person
                                       suffers. If you are a lover, you need
                                       to know what is happening to the
                                       person you love. If you are there for
                                       that person, you will notice when he
                                       or she suffers.
I suffer. Please help.                 This mantra is for you to practice
                                       when you yourself suffer, and
                                       you believe the other person has
                                       caused your suffering. Go to that
                                       person with mindfulness and
                                       concentration and say the mantra.
                                       It may be a little bit difficult
                                       because you feel hurt. It takes a
                                       little training, but you can do it.
This is a happy moment.                The fifth mantra is for us to
                                       remember how lucky we are that
                                       we have so many conditions of
                                       happiness available in the here and
                                       the now.
You are partly right.                  This mantra is to remind us that
                                       as human beings we have both
                                       positive and negative traits. Our
                                       head shouldn’t be turned by praise,
                                       nor should we despair when we’re
                                       criticized.
                                     93


                            no mud, no lotus
                          the first mantra
The first mantra is “I am here for you.” It’s not difficult to practice. To
love someone means to be there for him or for her. This is an art and a
practice. If you don’t have enough mindfulness and concentration, you
can’t be there one hundred percent for yourself or for the other person.
With the practice of mindful breathing, mindful walking, mindful sit-
ting, you can bring your mind home to your body and establish your-
self fully in the here and now, restoring your true presence. When you
love someone, you have to offer that person the best you have. The best
thing we can offer another person is our true presence.
     Before you can be there for someone else, you have to be there for
yourself. So we practice this mantra first with ourselves. “I am here for
you” also means that I am here for myself. The mind goes home to the
body and we become aware that we have a body. This is something we
forget, especially when we’re absorbed in our work.
     The practice of breathing in and out and bringing your mind
home to your body can be very pleasant. You enjoy your in-breath, your
body, and your mind. This can already have an effect on the other per-
son. That person may be lost in thinking or worries about the past or
the future. When you are truly there and you produce the mantra pow-
erfully, you help the other person to come back to himself or herself, to
be present here and now.
     The first definition of love is to be there. This is a practice. How
can you love if you are not there? In order to love you have to be there,
body and mind united. A true lover knows that the practice of mindful-
ness is the foundation of true love.
                                    94


                          practices for happiness
                         the second mantra
The second mantra is also very powerful and can create happiness for
both of you at the same time. “Darling, I know you are there, and I am
very happy.” You have already produced your true presence, and so you
are in a position to recognize the presence of another person, some-
one who is very precious to you. When you say, “Darling, I know you are
there,” you are also saying, “Your presence is very precious to me and is
crucial for my happiness.”
     You can’t make the second step unless you have made the first
step. The first step is the first mantra. “I am here. I recognize my pres-
ence. I offer my presence to you, my beloved one.” This is the best gift
a lover can make to her beloved one. Nothing is more precious than
your presence. You can buy things from the market. But no matter
how expensive the things are that you buy for that person, nothing is
as precious as your presence. With mindfulness you can make your
presence fresher, more pleasant, more loving, and you can offer that
wonderful presence to your beloved one and make happiness for both
of you.
                          the third mantra
The third mantra is needed when you notice that the other person suf-
fers. The third mantra can help him suffer less right away. First you
practice breathing, sitting, or walking to restore your presence. Then
you are ready to go to him and say, “Darling, I know you suffer, and that
is why I am here for you.” This is true love. True love is made of mind-
fulness. Because you are mindful, you know that something isn’t going
well with the other person. If you’re able to notice that, then you can do
something to help: “Darling, I know you suffer. That is why I am here
                                     95


                             no mud, no lotus
for you.” Before you’ve even had a chance to do anything he will suffer
less right away.
      When you suffer and your beloved one ignores your suffering, then
you suffer even more. But if the other person is aware of your suffer-
ing and offers his presence to you during these difficult moments, you
suffer less right away. It doesn’t take much time to bring some relief.
This is a mantra that you can use in your relationships when the other
person suffers.
                         the fourth mantra
The fourth mantra is a little bit more difficult, especially when you
have too much pride in you. The fourth mantra is for when you yourself
suffer, and you believe that the other person has caused your suffering.
This happens from time to time. If it had been another person who had
said or done that to you, you would have suffered less. But it was the
person you love the most who said or did that. That’s why you suffer
very deeply. You may have the impulse to punish her, because she has
dared to make you suffer.
      When we suffer we think that the other person has caused our suf-
fering. “She doesn’t love me. So why do I have to love her?” Our natural
tendency is to want to punish the other person. And the way we do that
is to show her that “I can survive very well without you.” This is an indi-
rect way of saying: “I don’t need you.” But that’s not true love. Many of
us have made that mistake. I also have made that mistake.
      But we learn. In fact, when we suffer we do need the other person.
That’s the commitment we made in the beginning of our relationship.
You have to be true and faithful to that commitment. When you suffer,
you should tell her that you suffer and that you need her help. But we
                                    96


                          practices for happiness
tend to do the opposite. We want to show her that we don’t need her.
We prefer to lock ourselves in our room and cry instead of asking for
help. There is pride in you. But in love, there is no place for pride. This
is why we need the fourth mantra: “Darling, I suffer; please help.”
     It’s so simple, yet it’s so difficult. But if you can bring yourself to
pronounce the mantra, you will suffer less right away. I guarantee it.
     If the other person notices that something is wrong and asks,
“Darling, are you suffering?” and tries to comfort you, you may have
the impulse to respond, “Suffer? Why should I suffer?” But that’s not
true; you suffer deeply. If she tries to come close and put her hand on
your shoulder, you may want to say, “Leave me alone.” Many of us com-
mit this kind of mistake.
     The practice of the fourth mantra is the opposite. You have to rec-
ognize that you suffer. “Darling, I suffer. I want you to know it. Please
help.” In fact the formula is really a little bit longer: “Darling, I suffer.
I don’t understand why you have said such a thing to me. I don’t under-
stand why you have done such a thing to me. I suffer. Please explain. I
need your help.” This is true love. But if you say, “I’m not suffering, I
don’t need your help,” that’s not true love.
     Please write the mantra on a piece of paper the size of a credit card
and put it in your wallet. The next time you suffer and you believe that
he or she is the cause of your suffering, remember to take it out and
read it, and you will know exactly what to do.
     According to this practice, you have the right to suffer twenty-four
hours, but not more. That’s the deadline. Then you have to practice the
fourth mantra. If you can’t go to the person, you can use your mobile
phone, your computer, or you can write it down on a piece of paper and
put it on her desk or somewhere she will see it. I’m sure that when you
are able to bring yourself to write it down, you will suffer less right away.
                                      97


                             no mud, no lotus
     The mantra can be split into three parts. The first part is, “Dar-
ling, I suffer, and I want you to know.” That is sharing; you share your
happiness and your suffering. “Please explain to me why you did that
to me, why you said that to me. I suffer.”
     The second part is: “I am doing my best.” It means I am a practi-
tioner of mindfulness, so when I get angry I don’t say or do anything
that can cause damage to myself or to you. I am practicing mindful
breathing, mindful walking, and looking deeply into my suffering, to
find out the root of my suffering. I believe that you have caused my suf-
fering. But because I’m a practitioner, I know I shouldn’t be too sure of
that. I’m looking to see whether my suffering has come from a wrong
perception on my part. Maybe you didn’t mean to say or do that. Since
I’m a practitioner, I’m now doing my best to practice looking deeply to
recognize my anger and embrace it tenderly.
     “I am doing my best” is a kind of reminder, and it’s also an invita-
tion for the other person to do the same. When she gets the message,
she might think: “Oh, I didn’t know he was suffering. What have I done,
what have I said so that he suffers like that?” Then both of you will be
practicing looking deeply, and if one of you discovers the cause, that
person should communicate right away and apologize for his or her
unskillfulness, so the other person doesn’t have to continue to suffer.
The second sentence invites both people to be aware of what is going
on and to look deeply to see what is the real cause of the suffering.
     The third sentence is: “Please help.” This part can be a little bit
diificult, but it’s very important; it takes some courage. When we love
each other, we need each other, especially when we suffer. Your suffer-
ing is her suffering. Her happiness is your happiness. Looking deeply
into the situation, we may have an insight as to how we can reconcile
and reestablish harmony between us.
                                    98


                         practices for happiness
     The three sentences are: “I suffer, and I want you to know it. I’m
doing my best. Please help.” When you take the piece of paper from
your wallet and read it, you will remember just what you need to do.
                          the fifth mantra
The fifth mantra is “This is a happy moment.” This isn’t autosugges-
tion or wishful thinking. There are many conditions of happiness for
us to enjoy if we are mindful enough to be aware of them. This man-
tra is to remind us both that we are very lucky to have so many condi-
tions of happiness available in the here and the now. Sitting with him,
walking with her, you may like to pronounce the fifth mantra, for us
to remember how lucky we are to have so many conditions of happi-
ness. If we don’t enjoy them, we are not wise at all. Recognizing that
this moment is a happy moment depends on your mindfulness. Only
mindfulness can help you touch the many conditions of happiness
that are available in the here and the now. There are more than enough
conditions for both of you to be happy. So as you sit together, as you
walk together, and have the opportunity to have some time together,
breathe in mindfully and be aware of how lucky you are. It is mindful-
ness that makes the present moment into a wonderful moment, into a
happy moment. The practitioner is an artist; she knows how to bring
happiness into the here and the now, with her practice.
                                    99


                            no mud, no lotus
                         the sixth mantra
The sixth mantra is perfect for dealing with the suffering that comes
from the complexes: thinking we are equal to, worse than, or better
than another person.
     When someone congratulates you or criticizes you, you can use the
sixth mantra: “Darling, you are partly right.” This means that “Your
criticism or praise is only partly right, because I have both weaknesses
and strengths in me. If you congratulate me, I shouldn’t get lost and
ignore the negative things in myself.”
     When we see something beautiful in the other person, we tend to
ignore the things that aren’t so beautiful. As human beings we have
both positive and negative qualities. So when your beloved one con-
gratulates you, telling you that you are the very image of perfection,
you can say, “Darling, that is only partly true. You know that I have the
other things in me too.” You retain your humility. You’re not a victim of
self-delusion, because you know that you’re not perfect.
     When the other person criticizes you or says you have nothing to
offer or, that you’re worthless, you can say the same thing, “Darling,
you are only partly right, because I do have good things in me too.”
                                    100


                          practices for happiness
         three: being present with
                   strong emotions
When a painful emotion comes up, stop whatever you’re doing and
take care of it. Pay attention to what is happening. The practice is sim-
ple. Lie down, put your hand on your belly, and begin to breathe. Or
you may sit on a cushion or on a chair. Stop thinking, and bring your
mind down to the level of the navel.
     When you look at a tree in a storm, if you focus your attention on
the top of the tree, you’ll see the leaves and branches blowing wildly in
the wind, and the tree will look so vulnerable, as though it could be bro-
ken at any time. But when you direct your attention down to the trunk
of the tree, there’s not so much movement. You see the stability of the
tree, and you see that the tree is deeply rooted in the soil and can with-
stand the storm. When we experience a strong emotion, the mind is
agitated like the top of the tree. We have to bring our mind down to the
trunk, to the abdomen, and focus all our attention on the rise and fall
of the abdomen.
     Breathing in, you notice the rising of your abdomen. Breathing
out, notice the falling of your abdomen. Breathe deeply and focus your
attention only on your in-breath and out-breath. If there is anything
to be aware of, it’s that an emotion is only an emotion, and that you
are much more than one emotion. You are body, feelings, perceptions,
mental formations, and consciousness. The territory of your being is
large. One emotion is very little. An emotion is something that comes
and stays for a while and eventually goes away. If during the time of the
emotion, you have that insight, that insight will save you. You don’t
have to die just because of one emotion.
     We shouldn’t wait until the strong emotion comes to begin
                                     101


                          no mud, no lotus
learning. That may be too late; the emotion may carry you away. But
you can learn now. Then, if the day after tomorrow you have a strong
emotion, you’ll have confidence that you can handle the strong
emotion.
                                 102


                           practices for happiness
              four: inviting the bell
Inviting the bell to sound is inviting happiness to enter our bodies and
take root there. Every time we hear the sound of the bell, we have the
chance to practice mindful breathing, calm our body, and notice our
happiness. We can invite all the cells in our body to join us in listening
to the bell and allowing the sound of the bell to penetrate into us. Lis-
tening deeply, we know that our ancestors are fully present in every cell
of our body. We listen in such a way that all our ancestors are listening
at the same time. If we can be peaceful and joyful while listening, then
all our ancestors will also experience peace and joy at the same time. It
is possible to invite all our ancestors to join us in listening to the bell.
                                     103


                                no mud, no lotus
                             f i v e : m e t ta
Metta meditation is a practice of cultivating understanding, love, and
compassion by looking deeply, first for ourselves and then for others.
Once we love and take care of ourselves, we can be much more helpful
to others. Metta meditation can be practiced in part or in full. Just say-
ing one line of the Metta meditation will already bring more compas-
sion and healing into the world.
     To love is, first of all, to accept ourselves as we actually are. That is
why in this love meditation, “Know thyself” is the first practice of love.
When we practice this, we see the conditions that have caused us to be
the way we are. This makes it easy for us to accept ourselves, including
our suffering and our happiness at the same time.
     Metta means loving kindness in Pali. We begin this with an aspi-
ration: “May I be . . . ” Then we transcend the level of aspiration and
look deeply at all the positive and negative characteristics of the object
of our meditation, in this case, ourselves. The willingness to love is not
yet love. We look deeply, with all our being, in order to understand.
We don’t just repeat the words, or imitate others, or strive after some
ideal. The practice of love meditation is not autosuggestion. We don’t
just say, “I love myself. I love all beings.” We look deeply at our body,
our feelings, our perceptions, our mental formations, and our con-
sciousness, and in just a few weeks, our aspiration to love will become
a deep intention. Love will enter our thoughts, our words, and our
actions, and we will notice that we have become “peaceful, happy, and
light in body and spirit; safe and free from injury; and free from anger,
afflictions, fear, and anxiety.”
     When we practice, we observe how much peace, happiness, and
lightness we already have. We notice whether we are anxious about
                                       104


                          practices for happiness
accidents or misfortunes, and how much anger, irritation, fear, anxi-
ety, or worry are already in us. As we become aware of the feelings in
us, our self-understanding will deepen. We will see how our fears and
lack of peace contribute to our unhappiness, and we will see the value
of loving ourselves and cultivating a heart of compassion.
      In this love meditation, “anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety” refer
to all the unwholesome, negative states of mind that dwell in us and
rob us of our peace and happiness. Anger, fear, anxiety, craving, greed,
and ignorance are the great afflictions of our time. By practicing mind-
ful living, we are able to deal with them, and our love is translated into
effective action.
      This is a love meditation adapted from the Visuddhimagga (The
Path of Purification) by Buddhaghosa, a fifth-century ce systematiza-
tion of the Buddha’s teachings.
      To practice this love meditation, sit still, calm your body and your
breathing, and recite it to yourself. The sitting position is wonderful
for practicing this. Sitting still, you are not too preoccupied with other
matters, so you can look deeply at yourself as you are, cultivate your
love for yourself, and determine the best ways to express this love in
the world.
      May I be peaceful, happy, and light in body and spirit.
      May she be peaceful, happy, and light in body and spirit.
      May he be peaceful, happy, and light in body and spirit.
      May they be peaceful, happy, and light in body and spirit.
      May I be safe and free from injury.
      May she be safe and free from injury.
      May he be safe and free from injury.
                                     105


                             no mud, no lotus
     May they be safe and free from injury.
     May I be free from anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety.
     May she be free from anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety.
     May he be free from anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety.
     May they be free from anger, afflictions, fear, and anxiety.
Begin practicing this love meditation on yourself (“I”). Until you are
able to love and take care of yourself, you cannot be of much help to oth-
ers. After that, practice on others (“he/she,” “they”)—first on someone
you like, then on someone neutral to you, then on someone you love,
and finally on someone the mere thought of whom makes you suffer.
     According to the Buddha, a human being is made of five elements,
called skandhas in Sanskrit. They are: form (body), feelings, percep-
tions, mental formations, and consciousness. In a way, you are the sur-
veyor, and these elements are your territory. To know the real situation
within yourself, you have to know your own territory, including the
elements within you that are at war with each other. In order to bring
about harmony, reconciliation, and healing within, you have to under-
stand yourself. Looking and listening deeply, surveying your territory,
is the beginning of love meditation.
     Begin this practice by looking deeply into your body. Ask: How is
my body in this moment? How was it in the past? How will it be in the
future? Later, when you meditate on someone you like, someone neu-
tral to you, someone you love, and someone you hate, you also begin
by looking at his physical aspects. Breathing in and out, visualize his
face; his way of walking, sitting, and talking; his heart, lungs, kidneys,
and all the organs in his body, taking as much time as you need to bring
these details into awareness. But always start with yourself. When
                                    106


                          practices for happiness
you see your own five skandhas clearly, understanding and love arise
naturally, and you know what to do and what not to do to take care of
yourself.
     Look into your body to see whether it is at peace or is suffering
from illness. Look at the condition of your lungs, your heart, your
intestines, your kidneys, and your liver to see what the real needs of
your body are. When you do, you will eat, drink, and act in ways that
demonstrate your love and your compassion for your body. Usually you
follow ingrained habits. But when you look deeply, you see that many
of these habits harm your body and mind, so you work to transform
your habits in ways conducive to good health and vitality.
     Next, observe your feelings—whether they are pleasant, unpleas-
ant, or neutral. Feelings flow in us like a river, and each feeling is a drop
of water in that river. Look into the river of your feelings and see how
each feeling came to be. See what has been preventing you from being
happy, and do your best to transform those things. Practice touching
the wondrous, refreshing, and healing elements that are already in you
and in the world. Doing so, you become stronger and better able to love
yourself and others.
     Then meditate on your perceptions. The Buddha observed, “The
person who suffers most in this world is the person who has many
wrong perceptions, and most of our perceptions are erroneous.” You
see a snake in the dark and you panic, but when your friend shines a
light on it, you see that it is only a rope. You have to know which wrong
perceptions cause you to suffer. Please write beautifully the sentence,
“Are you sure?” on a piece of paper and tape it to your wall. Love med-
itation helps you learn to look with clarity and serenity in order to
improve the way you perceive.
     Next, observe your mental formations, the ideas and tendencies
                                      107


                             no mud, no lotus
within you that lead you to speak and act as you do. Practice looking
deeply to discover the true nature of your mental formations—how you
are influenced by your individual consciousness and also by the col-
lective consciousness of your family, ancestors, and society. Unwhole-
some mental formations cause so much disturbance; wholesome
mental formations bring about love, happiness, and liberation.
     Finally, look at your consciousness. According to Buddhism, con-
sciousness is like a field with every possible kind of seed in it: seeds of
love, compassion, joy, and equanimity; seeds of anger, fear, and anx-
iety; and seeds of mindfulness. Consciousness is the storehouse that
contains all these seeds, all the possibilities of whatever might arise in
your mind. When your mind is not at peace, it may be because of the
desires and feelings in your store consciousness. To live in peace, you
have to be aware of your tendencies—your habit energies—so you can
exercise some self-control. This is the practice of preventive health
care. Look deeply into the nature of your feelings to find their roots, to
see which feelings need to be transformed, and nourish those feelings
that bring about peace, joy, and well-being.
     You can continue with the following aspirations, first for yourself,
then for others.
     May I learn to look at myself with the eyes of understanding
     and love.
     May I learn to look at her with the eyes of understanding
     and love.
     May I learn to look at him with the eyes of understanding
     and love.
     May I learn to look at them with the eyes of understanding
     and love.
                                    108


                         practices for happiness
     May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and
     happiness in myself.
     May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and
     happiness in her.
     May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and
     happiness in him.
     May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and
     happiness in them.
     May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving,
     and delusion in myself.
     May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving,
     and delusion in her.
     May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving,
     and delusion in him.
     May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving,
     and delusion in them.
“May I learn to look at myself with the eyes of understanding and love.”
One time when we practiced love meditation in Plum Village a young
laywoman said to me, “When I meditated on my boyfriend, I found
that I began to love him less. And when I meditated on the person I
dislike the most, I suddenly hated myself.” Before the meditation, her
love for her boyfriend was so passionate that she was not able to see his
shortcomings. During her practice, she began to see him more clearly
and she realized that he is less perfect than she imagined. She began to
love him in a way that had more understanding in it, and therefore it
was deeper and healthier.
                                    109


                             no mud, no lotus
     She also had fresh insights into the person she disliked the most.
She saw some of the reasons he was like that, and she saw how she had
caused him to suffer by reacting to him harshly.
     Again, we begin with ourselves to understand our own true nature.
As long as we reject ourselves and continue to harm our own body
and mind, there’s no point in talking about loving and accepting oth-
ers. With mindfulness we will be able to recognize our habitual ways
of thinking and the contents of our thoughts. We shine the light of
mindfulness on the neural pathways in our mind so we can see them
clearly.
     Whenever we see or hear something, our attention can be appro-
priate or inappropriate. With mindfulness we can recognize which it
is and release inappropriate attention and nurture appropriate atten-
tion. Appropriate mental attention, yoniso manaskara in Sanskrit,
brings us happiness, peace, clarity, and love. Inappropriate attention,
ayoniso manaskara, fills our mind with sorrow, anger, and prejudice.
Mindfulness helps us practice appropriate attention and water the
seeds of peace, joy, and liberation in us.
     Next, we use mindfulness to illuminate our speech, so we can use
loving speech and stop before we say anything that creates conflict for
ourselves and others. Then we look into our physical actions. Mindful-
ness illuminates how we stand, sit, walk, smile, and frown, and how we
look at others. We recognize which actions are beneficial and which
bring harm.
     Understanding of oneself and others is the key that opens the door
of love and acceptance of oneself and others.
     “May I be able to recognize and touch the seeds of joy and happi-
ness in myself.” The soil of our mind contains many seeds, positive and
negative. We are the gardeners who identify, water, and cultivate the
                                   110


                          practices for happiness
best seeds. Touching the seeds of joy, peace, freedom, solidity, and love
in ourselves and in each other is an important practice that helps us
grow in the direction of health and happiness.
     “May I learn to identify and see the sources of anger, craving, and
delusion in myself.” We look deeply to see how these came about, what
are their roots, and how long they have been there. We practice mind-
fulness in our daily lives to be aware that such poisons as craving, anger,
delusion, arrogance, and suspicion are present in us. We can look and
see how much suffering they have caused ourselves and others.
     We need to master our own anger before we can help others to do
the same. Arguing with others only waters the seeds of anger in us.
When anger arises, return to yourself and use the energy of mindful-
ness to embrace, soothe, and illuminate it. Don’t think you’ll feel bet-
ter if you lash out and make the other person suffer. The other person
might respond even more harshly and anger will escalate. The Buddha
taught that when anger arises, close your eyes and ears, return to your-
self, and tend to the source of anger within. Transforming your anger
is not just for your personal liberation. Everyone around you and even
those more distant will benefit.
     Look deeply at your anger, as you would look at your own child.
Don’t reject it or hate it. The point of meditation is not to turn yourself
into a battlefield, one side opposing the other. Conscious breathing
soothes and calms the anger, and mindfulness penetrates it. Anger is
just an energy, and all energies can be transformed. Meditation is the
art of using one kind of energy to transform another.
     May I know how to nourish the seeds of joy in myself every day.
     May I know how to nourish the seeds of joy in her every day.
     May I know how to nourish the seeds of joy in him every day.
                                     111


                             no mud, no lotus
     May I know how to nourish the seeds of joy in them every day.
     May I be able to live fresh, solid, and free.
     May she be able to live fresh, solid, and free.
     May he be able to live fresh, solid, and free.
     May they be able to live fresh, solid, and free.
     May I be free from attachment and aversion, but not
     be indifferent.
     May she be free from attachment and aversion, but not
     be indifferent.
     May he be free from attachment and aversion, but not
     be indifferent.
     May they be free from attachment and aversion, but not
     be indifferent.
These aspirations help us to water the seeds of joy and happiness that
lie deep in our store consciousness. The notions we entertain about
what will bring us happiness are just a trap. We forget that they are
only ideas. Our idea of happiness can prevent us from being happy.
When we believe that happiness should take a particular form, we fail
to see the opportunities for joy that are right in front of us.
     Happiness is not an individual matter; it has the nature of inter-
being. When you are able to make one friend smile, her happiness will
nourish you also. When you find ways to foster peace, joy, and happi-
ness, you do it for everyone. Begin by nourishing yourself with joyful
feelings. Practice walking meditation outside, enjoying the fresh air,
the trees, and the stars in the night sky. What do you do to nourish
yourself? It’s important to discuss this subject with dear friends to
                                     112


                           practices for happiness
find concrete ways to nourish joy and happiness. When you succeed in
doing this, your suffering, sorrow, and painful mental formations will
begin to transform.
      “May I be able to live fresh, solid, and free.” “Fresh” is a transla-
tion of the Vietnamese word for “cool, without fever.” Jealousy, anger,
and craving are a kind of fever. “Solid” refers to stability. If you aren’t
solid, you won’t be able to accomplish much. Each day you only need
to take a few solid steps in the direction of your goal. Each morning,
you rededicate yourself to your path in order not to go astray. Before
going to sleep at night, take a few minutes to review the day. “Did I live
in the direction of my ideals today?” If you see that you took two or
three steps in that direction, that is good enough. If you didn’t, say to
yourself, “I’ll do better tomorrow.” Don’t compare yourself with others.
Just look to yourself to see whether you are going in the direction you
cherish. Take refuge in things that are solid. If you lean on something
that isn’t solid, you will fall down. A few Sanghas may not yet be solid,
but usually taking refuge in a Sangha is a wise thing to do. There are
Sangha members everywhere who are practicing earnestly.
      “Freedom” means transcending the trap of harmful desires and
being without attachments—whether to an institution, a diploma, or a
certain rank. From time to time we encounter people who are free and
can do whatever is needed.
      “Indifference.” When we are indifferent, nothing is enjoyable,
interesting, or worth striving for. We don’t experience love or under-
standing, and our life has no joy or meaning. We don’t even notice the
beauties of nature or the laughter of children. We are unable to touch
the suffering or the happiness of others. If you find yourself in a state
of indifference, ask your friends for help. Even with all its suffering,
life is filled with many wonders.
                                     113


                            no mud, no lotus
      “Free from attachment and aversion.” The kind of love the Buddha
wanted us to cultivate is not possessive or attached. All of us, young
and old, have a tendency to become attached. As soon as we are born,
attachment to self is already there. In wholesome love relationships,
there is a certain amount of possessiveness and attachment, but if
it’s excessive, both lover and beloved will suffer. If a father thinks he
“owns” his son, or if a young man tries to put restrictions on his girl-
friend, then love becomes a prison. This is also true in relationships
between friends, teachers, students, and so on. Attachment obstructs
the flow of life. And without mindfulness, attachment always becomes
aversion. Both attachment and aversion lead to suffering. Look deeply
to discover the nature of your love, and identify the degree of attach-
ment, despotism, and possessiveness in your love. Then you can begin
untangling the knots. The seeds of true love—loving kindness, com-
passion, joy, and equanimity—are already there in our store conscious-
ness. Through the practice of deep looking, the seeds of suffering and
attachment will shrink and the positive seeds will grow. We can trans-
form attachment and aversion and arrive at a love that is spacious and
all-encompassing.
                                  114


                          practices for happiness
                s i x : d e e p r e l a x at i o n
When we fall down, we have physical pain. When we’re sad, we call it
emotional pain. But mind and body are not separate, and suffering
is not just an emotion. We hold suffering in our body. The practice of
deep relaxation is a way to acknowledge and soothe the suffering in the
body and the suffering in the mind.
     Deep relaxation begins with observing our bodies. You can start
with your eyes. “Breathing in, I’m aware of my eyes. Breathing out, I
smile to my eyes with gratitude and love.” Then bring your awareness
down to your nose, your mouth, your throat, and continue down to your
toes. You’re doing a scan of your body, not with an x-ray, but with a ray
of mindfulness. You go through your whole body, bringing your aware-
ness to each part. “Breathing in, I’m aware of my heart. Breathing out,
I smile to my heart with love.” My heart is essential to my well-being.
It works nonstop and nourishes all the cells in my body. I’m so grate-
ful to my heart. I get to rest and sleep, but my heart never stops. Yet
I’ve done things to hurt my heart. I’ve drunk too much alcohol; I’ve
smoked. I haven’t been very kind to my heart.” As you breathe in and
out and embrace your heart with mindfulness, you can see things like
this. This kind of insight can transform and heal. You know exactly
what you should consume and what you should not consume to be kind
to your heart, which is an essential condition of your happiness. You go
through all your organs, all the parts of your body in this way. This is
the contemplation of the body in the body.
     There’s a basic text in Buddhism that teaches us how to meditate
on our body. It’s called the Kayagatasati Sutta, Mindfulness of the Body
in the Body. The body is an important object of meditation. It contains
the cosmos, the Kingdom of God, the Pure Land of the Buddha, and
                                    115


                            no mud, no lotus
our ancestors both spiritual and genetic. Meditating on the body we
can get in touch with all these things and nourish our happiness and
well-being as well as the happiness and well-being of those around us.
                                  116


                          practices for happiness
       seven: the five mindfulness
                            trainings
The Five Mindfulness Trainings are guidelines for how to live our daily
lives in a way that nourishes happiness and transforms ill-being. The
Five Mindfulness Trainings are also the kind of thinking and acting
that have the power to heal. You can recite them daily or monthly,
alone or with a group, to renew your intentions and as inspiration to
practice.
   the first mindfulness training: reverence for life
Aware of the suffering caused by the destruction of life, I am commit-
ted to cultivating the insight of interbeing, compassion, and learning
ways to protect the lives of people, animals, plants, and minerals. I am
determined not to kill, not to let others kill, and not to support any act
of killing in the world, in my thinking, or in my way of life. Seeing that
harmful actions arise from anger, fear, greed, and intolerance, which
in turn come from dualistic and discriminative thinking, I will culti-
vate openness, nondiscrimination, and nonattachment to views in
order to transform violence, fanaticism, and dogmatism in myself and
in the world.
   the second mindfulness training: true happiness
Aware of the suffering caused by exploitation, social injustice, steal-
ing, and oppression, I am committed to practicing generosity in my
thinking, speaking, and acting. I am determined not to steal and not
to possess anything that should belong to others; and I will share my
time, energy, and material resources with those who are in need. I
will practice looking deeply to see that the happiness and suffering
                                    117


                           no mud, no lotus
of others are not separate from my own happiness and suffering; that
true happiness is not possible without understanding and compas-
sion; and that running after wealth, fame, power, and sensual plea-
sures can bring much suffering and despair. I am aware that happiness
depends on my mental attitude and not on external conditions, and
that I can live happily in the present moment simply by remember-
ing that I already have more than enough conditions to be happy. I am
committed to practicing Right Livelihood so that I can help reduce the
suffering of living beings on Earth and reverse the process of global
warming.
        the third mindfulness training: true love
Aware of the suffering caused by sexual misconduct, I am committed
to cultivating responsibility and learning ways to protect the safety
and integrity of individuals, couples, families, and society. Knowing
that sexual desire is not love, and that sexual activity motivated by
craving always harms myself as well as others, I am determined not
to engage in sexual relations without true love and a deep, long-term
commitment made known to my family and friends. I will do every-
thing in my power to protect children from sexual abuse and to prevent
couples and families from being broken by sexual misconduct. Seeing
that body and mind are one, I am committed to learning appropriate
ways to take care of my sexual energy and cultivating loving kindness,
compassion, joy, and inclusiveness—which are the four basic elements
of true love—for my greater happiness and the greater happiness of
others. Practicing true love, we know that we will continue beautifully
into the future.
                                  118


                         practices for happiness
              the fourth mindfulness training:
              loving speech and deep listening
Aware of the suffering caused by unmindful speech and the inability to
listen to others, I am committed to cultivating loving speech and com-
passionate listening in order to relieve suffering and to promote rec-
onciliation and peace in myself and among other people, ethnic and
religious groups, and nations. Knowing that words can create happi-
ness or suffering, I am committed to speaking truthfully, using words
that inspire confidence, joy, and hope. When anger is manifesting in
me, I am determined not to speak. I will practice mindful breathing
and walking in order to recognize and to look deeply into my anger.
I know that the roots of anger can be found in my wrong perceptions
and lack of understanding of the suffering in myself and in the other
person. I will speak and listen in a way that can help myself and the
other person to transform suffering and see the way out of difficult sit-
uations. I am determined not to spread news that I do not know to be
certain and not to utter words that can cause division or discord. I will
practice Right Diligence to nourish my capacity for understanding,
love, joy, and inclusiveness, and gradually transform anger, violence,
and fear that lie deep in my consciousness.
                the fifth mindfulness training:
                    nourishment and healing
Aware of the suffering caused by unmindful consumption, I am com-
mitted to cultivating good health, both physical and mental, for
myself, my family, and my society by practicing mindful eating, drink-
ing, and consuming. I will practice looking deeply into how I consume
the Four Kinds of Nutriments, namely edible foods, sense impres-
sions, volition, and consciousness. I am determined not to gamble, or
                                   119


                            no mud, no lotus
to use alcohol, drugs, or any other products that contain toxins, such
as certain websites, electronic games, TV programs, films, magazines,
books, and conversations. I will practice coming back to the present
moment to be in touch with the refreshing, healing, and nourishing
elements in me and around me, not letting regrets and sorrow drag me
back into the past nor letting anxieties, fear, or craving pull me out of
the present moment. I am determined not to try to cover up loneliness,
anxiety, or other suffering by losing myself in consumption. I will con-
template interbeing and consume in a way that preserves peace, joy,
and well-being in my body and consciousness, and in the collective
body and consciousness of my family, my society, and the Earth.
                                   120


                         practices for happiness
        e i g h t : wa l k i n g m e d i tat i o n
In our daily lives we have the habit of running. We seek peace, success,
and love—we are always on the run—and our steps are one means by
which we run away from the present moment. But life is available only
in the present moment; peace is available only in the present moment.
Taking a step and taking refuge in your step, means to stop running.
For those of us who are used to always running, it is a revolution to
make a step and stop running. We make a step, and if we know how to
make it, peace becomes available in that moment of touching the
Earth with our feet. It would be a pity to let a whole day pass without
enjoying walking on the Earth.
     Usually, our in-breath tends to be a little shorter than our out-
breath. When you breathe in, you may take two steps and say: “I have
arrived, I have arrived.” When you breathe out, you might like to take
three steps and say: “I am home, I am home, I am home.” “Home”
means being at home in the present moment where you can touch all
the wonders of life. We should be able to walk with a lot of tenderness
and happiness on this beautiful planet. “I have arrived, I am home,”
is not a statement, but a practice. Allow yourself to sink deeply into
the here and the now, because life is possible only in the present, life
is available only in the present moment, and you know that you have
the capacity to touch life in the present moment, in the here and
the now.
     We may have lost our freedom and our sovereignty. We may allow
ourselves to be pushed and pulled away from the here and the now.
Now we have to resist the habit energy that pushes us to run. We have
to recover our sovereignty and reclaim our freedom and walk like a
free person on Earth. Freedom doesn’t mean political freedom. It
                                   121


                            no mud, no lotus
means freedom from the past, from the future, from our worries and
our fear. Each step can help free us. We resist, we don’t allow ourselves
to be carried away anymore. We want to be free, because we know that
without freedom, no happiness, no peace, will be possible. The Buddha
said that freedom and solidity are the two characteristics of nirvana.
Imagine someone who has no solidity and no freedom. That person
can never be happy. Walking like this helps us to cultivate freedom and
solidity, which will bring us well-being and happiness.
     Let your steps follow your breath, not the other way around. Let
your breathing be natural, never forced. Breathing in, if your lungs
want two steps, then we can take exactly two steps. If you feel better
with three steps then give yourself three steps while breathing in.
When you breathe out, listen to your lungs. Whenever you feel that you
want to take an extra step while breathing out, then allow yourself to
have one more step breathing out. Every step should be enjoyable.
     Sometimes it’s helpful to practice in a park or some other beauti-
ful, quiet place. This nourishes our spirit and strengthens our mind-
fulness. We walk slowly but not too slowly, so we don’t stand out and
make people feel uncomfortable. This is a kind of invisible practice.
We can enjoy nature and our own serenity. When we see something we
want to touch with our mindfulness—the blue sky, the hills, a tree, or
a bird—we just stop, but while we do so, we continue breathing in and
out mindfully.
     Practice stopping while you’re walking. If you can stop while
 walking, then you’ll be able to stop when doing your other daily activi-
ties, whether that is cleaning the kitchen, watering the garden, or eat-
ing breakfast.
     If you suffer from depression, your depression won’t be able to
go away until you know how to stop. You’ve lived in such a way that
                                   122


                          practices for happiness
depression has become possible. You’ve been running and not allowed
yourself the time to rest, to relax, and to live your daily life deeply.
Spending time each day doing mindful walking can help. Arrange
your life so that you can do mindful walking every day. It’s good to
walk alone, but it’s also good to practice walking meditation with the
Sangha, to get support. You can ask a friend to go with you, or you can
even take the hand of a child and walk with him or her.
     We should be able to practice mindful breathing and walking
everywhere—in our home, at work, at school, in a hospital, even in
Congress. Some years ago we offered a retreat for Congresspeople in
Washington D.C. And now there are a number of Congressmen who
know how to practice walking meditation on Capitol Hill.
     When you walk to the bus stop or from one room to another, make
it into a walking meditation. Even if your surroundings are full of noise
and agitation, you can still walk in rhythm with your breathing. Even
in the commotion of a big city, you can walk with peace, happiness,
and an inner smile. This is what it means to live fully in every moment
of every day of your life. This is something that is possible to do.
     Walking in walking meditation is walking just to enjoy walking.
You don’t have any desire to arrive anywhere. Walking and not arriv-
ing, that is the technique. And you enjoy every step you make. Every
step brings you home to the here and the now. Your true home is the
here and the now, because only in this moment, in this place, called
the here and the now, is life possible. Every step you take should bring
you back to peace, to the present moment.
     According to Master Linji the miracle is not to walk on water or
in thin air, but to walk on Earth. Walk in such a way that you become
fully alive and joy and happiness are possible. That is the miracle that
everyone can perform. I perform that miracle every time I walk; and
                                     123


                           no mud, no lotus
you can too. If you have mindfulness, concentration, and insight then
every step you make on this Earth is performing a miracle.
                                124


Parallax Press
P.O. Box 7355
Berkeley, California 94707
parallax.org
Parallax Press is the publishing division of Unified Buddhist Church, Inc.
© 2014 by Unified Buddhist Church
All rights reserved
Edited by Rachel Neumann
Cover and text design by Jess Morphew
Cover image © Magnia / Shutterstock M A GNI A / SHUTTERSTOCK
Author photo © Richard Friday
ISBN: 978-1-937006-86-0


Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Nhát Hanh, Thích, author.
 No mud, no lotus : the art of transforming suffering / Thich Nhat Hanh.
     pages cm
 ISBN 978-1-937006-85-3 (paperback : alk. paper)
1. Suffering—Religious aspects—Buddhism. 2. Spiritual life—Buddhism. I. Title.
 BQ9800.T5392N454617 2014
 294.3’4442--dc23
                                             2014032382
1 2 3 4 5 / 18 17 16 15 14


               r e l at e d t i t l e s
        f r o m pa r a l l a x p r e s s
                      Awakening Joy
         James Baraz and Shoshana Alexander
                     Deep Relaxation
                   Sister Chan Khong
                        Happiness
                    Thich Nhat Hanh
                         Healing
                   Sister Dang Nghiem
                 Love Letter to the Earth
                    Thich Nhat Hanh
                Mindfulness Survival Kit
                    Thich Nhat Hanh
                    Not Quite Nirvana
                    Rachel Neumann
                        Pass It On
                       Joanna Macy
          Present Moment Wonderful Moment
                    Thich Nhat Hanh
                       Solid Ground
Sylvia Boorstein, Norman Fischer, and Tsoknyi Rinpoche
                Ten Breaths to Happiness
                     Glen Schneider
                Understanding Our Mind
                    Thich Nhat Hanh


Parallax Press is a nonprofit publisher, founded and inspired by Zen Master
Thich Nhat Hanh. We publish books on mindfulness in daily life and are
committed to making these teachings accessible to everyone and preserving
them for future generations. We do this work to alleviate suffering and
contribute to a more just and joyful world.
To learn more about our books, click here
Want to connect with like-minded readers? Check out our book club and our
blog for reader’s guides and the latest news from Parallax Press.
Subscribe to our newsletter to receive special deals, news from our authors,
and inspiration.
Visit us on Facebook
Follow us on Twitter
Add us on Goodreads


            To reach mindful living communities following
           the tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh please contact:
                                Plum Village
                                13 Martineau
                          33580 Dieulivol, France
                           www.plumvillage.org
                           Blue Cliff Monastery
                            3 Mindfulness Road
                           Pine Bush, NY 12566
                       www.bluecliffmonastery.org
                           Deer Park Monastery
                              2499 Melru Lane
                           Escondido, CA 92026
                      www.deerparkmonastery.org
                       Magnolia Grove Monastery
                               123 Towles Rd.
                           Batesville, MS 38606
                   www.magnoliagrovemonastery.org
The Mindfulness Bell, a journal of the art of mindful living in the tradition
  of Thich Nhat Hanh, is published three times a year by Plum Village.
     To subscribe or to see the worldwide directory of Sanghas, visit
                         www.mindfulnessbell.org
Thich         Nhat Hanh
  National bestselling author of Anger
  and Living Buddha, Living Christ
no death)
Comtortlng Wisdom tor Lite


                              PRAISE FOR
                      Thich Nhat Hanh
"He shows us the connection between personal, inner peace and peace
on earth:'                                   -His Holiness the Dalai Lama
"Thich Nhat Hanh is a holy man, for he is humble and devout!'
                                   -Martin Luther King, Jr., in nominating
                               Thich Nhat Hanh for the Nobel Peace Prize
"One of the greatest teachers of our time:'            -Robert Thurman
"Thich Nhat Hanh is a real poet:'                         -Robert Lowell
"He has immense presence and both personal and Buddhist authority.
If there is a candidate for 'Living Buddha' on earth today, it is Thich
Nhat Hanh:'                                               -Richard Baker
'Thich Nhat Hanh writes with the voice of the Buddha:'
                                                       -Sogyal Rinpoche
"Thich Nhat Hanh is more my brother than many who are nearer to
me in race and nationality, because he and I see things the exact same
way:'                                                  -Thomas Merton
                        No Death) No Fear
           Chosen as One of the Best Spiritual Books of the Year
                          by Spirituality & Health
"[A] simple but profound message ... comforting words in a time and
place when seeking happiness is often relegated to a 'to-do' list:'
                                                           -The Denver Post
"In this masterwork, [Thich Nhat HanhJ presents his understanding of
death along with profound ancillary teachings on freedom, looking
deeply, transforming grie£ practicing resurrection, touching the Earth,
and accompanying the dying ... with the simplicity and clarity that 'are
hallmarks of his writing. We come to see that we can be liberated from
our notions of birth and death, coming and going, permanent selves
and annihilation ... By living fully in the present, we can experience
happiness and be freed from suffering and fear. Thich Nhat Hanh has
rendered us an invaluable service by opening our hearts and minds to
the wonderful becoming that is our joy and our destiny:'
                                                      -Spirituality & Health
                              continued . ..


"If you think there's nothing new to be said about Buddhism, then take
a look at [No Death, No rear]. Buddhist luminary Thich Nhat Hanh con-
fronts another heady topic ... through parables, stories and his own
brand of faith:'                                             -Body & Soul
"Zen master Nhat Hanh turns his hard-earned wisdom as a survivor of
war, persecution, and exile to the age-old dilemma of what happens
when one dies. If the greatest fear is, as he suggests, that one becomes
nothing, then how is one to live with this threat of complete annihila-
tion? Using Buddhist parables and anecdotes, Nhat Hanh offers an
alternative perspective [that some readers may find] refreshing, espe-
cially when it is expressed as calmly and matter-of-factly as Nhat Hanh
expresses it:'                                                    -Book list
                                  Anger
           Chosen as One of the Best Spiritual Books of the Year
                           by Spirituality & Health
"The Buddhist monk addresses the causes of anger and suggests prac-
tical tools to embrace and heal it ... Reminding us that small spiritual
matters are really large spiritual matters, the author offers wisdom and
serenity to comfort readers as they work through anger to a place of
'being peace: "                                            -Library Journal
"Americans would do well to cool down with the prolific Buddhist
monk ... Hanh's suggestions cut refreshingly against the grain. Hanh
reminds us that anger begins and ends with ourselves; we may feel that
we are mad at our wife and son, but really we are the direct objects of
our rage. Hanh doesn't limit his task to discussing anger between fami-
lies and friends; he also deals with anger between citizens and govern-
ments. That expansive vision is not surprising (Hanh, after all, is a
Nobel Peace Prize nominee) but it is refreshing, uplifting this book out
of the self-absorbed, self-help pile. Like Hanh's other books, this is not
weighed down with Buddhist terminology. The appendices ... give it
the specifically Buddhist spice that some readers will appreciate. The
meat of the book, however, will be accessible to a broad, ecumenical
audience:'                                                -Publishers Weekry


                               Going Home:
                   Jesus and Buddha as Brothers
"Explores the connections between Buddhism and Christianity ... a
valuable addition to the growing literature on these two religious tradi-
tions:'                                                     -Kirkus Reviews
"[A] beautiful and inspiring gift to all seeking a more meaningful spir-
ituality:'                                                  -Library Journal
"His book speaks powerfully about the need for tolerance and love in
overcoming differences:'                                   -Publishers Weekry
                         Fragrant Palm Leaves:
                        Journals 1962-l966
"One of the sweetest and most personally revealing of Thich Nhat
Hanh's books, it shows the planting of his seeds of remarkable wis-
dom:'                                                     -Jack Kornfield,
                                                author of A Path with Heart
"Enlightening ... To read his thoughts is to understand the connection
between public life and private life, and that such 'interbeing' makes for
ecstatic joy:'                                   -Maxine Hong Kingston
"In Fragrant Palm Leaves, the venerable poet emerges poignantly disclosing
the essence of enlightenment, and also life itself' -Robert Thurman,
                                                    author of Inner Revolution
"Informative and inspiring."                               -Publishers Weekry


          OTHER BOOKS
    BY THICH NHAT HANH
                 Anger
             Going Home
   Living Buddha, Living Christ
        Fragrant Palm Leaves
              Being Peace
       The Blooming   of a Lotus
        Breathe! You Are Alive
    Call Me By My True Names
   Cultivating the Mind    of Love
     For a Future to Be Possible
The Heart    of the Buddha's Teaching
    The Heart of Understanding
    The Long Road Turns to Joy
           Love in Action
    The Miracle    of Mindfulness
       Old Path White Clouds
      The Path  of Emancipation
         Peace Is Every Step
Present Moment, Wonderful Moment
         The Sun My Heart
            Touching Peace
    Transformation and Healing


NO DEATH,
  NO FEAR
 Comforting Wisdom for Life
 THICH NHAT HANH
      RIVERHEAD BOOKS
           NEW YORK


        Most Riverhead Books are available at special quantity discounts for bulk
        purchases for sales promotions, premiums, fund-raising, or educational use.
        Special books, or book excerpts, can also be created to fit specific needs.
        For details, write: Special Markets, The Berkley Publishing Group, 375
        Hudson Street, New York, New York 10014.
While the author has made every effort to provide accurate telephone numbers and
 Internet addresses at the time of publication, neither the publisher nor the author
 assumes any responsibiliry for errors, or for changes that occur after publication.
                                     Riverhead Books
                     Published by The Berkley Publishing Group
                       A division of Penguin Group (USA) Inc.
                                    375 Hudson Street
                               New York, New York 10014
                    Copyright © 2002 by Unified Buddhist Church
                          Cover design © 2002 Jess Morphew
                            Book design by Gretchen Achilles
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof. may not be reproduced in any form
without permission. The scanning, uploading, and distribution of this book via the
 Internet or via any other means without permission of the publisher is illegal and
 punishable by law. Please purchase only authorized electronic editions, and do not
participate in or encourage electronic piracy of copyrighted materials. Your support
                           of the author's rights is appreciated.
                    First Riverhead hardcover edition: August 2002
                 First Riverhead trade paperback edition: August 2003
                     Riverhead trade paperback ISBN: 1-57322-333-6
The Library of Congress has catalogued the Riverhead hardcover edition as follows:
                                   Nhat Hanh, Thkh.
          No death, no fear: comforting wisdom for life / Thich Nhat Hanh.
                                          p. cm.
                                    ISBN 1-57322-221-6
       I.  Spiritual life-Buddhism. 2. Buddhism-Doctrines. I. Title
                    BQ4302 .N43 2002                         2002021358
                                      294·3'444--dC21
                         Printed in the United States of America
                           109      8   7    6


           Contents
          FOREWORD
               IX
              ONE
  Where Do We Come From?
      Where Do We Go?
             TWO
        The Real Fear
               17
            THREE
The Practice of Looking Deeply
               37
             FOUR
 Transforming Grief and Fear
              57


                FIVE
          New Beginnings
                 91
                 SIX
     The Address oj Happiness
                 103
               SEVEN
    Continuing Manifestations
                 119
               EIGHT
 Fear, Acceptance and Forgiveness:
The Practice oj Touching the Earth
                 133
                NINE
      Accompanying the Dying
                 173


                          Foreword
One day, over lunch, my father said to me, ''The last time I
saw my father, he was in a basket in the living room." We
were sitting together at the outdoor dining area of a Mexican
restaurant in Key West, Florida. He looked up from his plate
of beans and rice, and continued. "My father was a working
man. He was a baker; he worked at the co-op in downtown
Fitchburg on Leominster Street."
     "Tell me about your father's death," I said.
     "I don't know anything," he replied.
     "What did people say?"
     "No one ever said anything. And I never asked." He re-
turned to the silence that I knew all too well.
    Sacred Heart Church is two blocks from the house on
Sanborn Street in West Fitchburg, Massachusetts, where my
father said good-bye to the grandfather I never knew. This
was my family's spiritual center when I was growing up. It
was a refuge from the daily grind of factory work, arguing
spouses, unpaid bills and excess alcohol. This is where I was
baptized and where I was sent for my spiritual education.
                               IX


                           FOREWORD
Every Monday afternoon, after a full day at public school, I
reluctantly trudged up Water Street to this building for two
hours of catechism.
     I still remember the first day, sitting next to my cousin
Patty, our fresh new catechism books in hand. As two nuns
stood in front of the class, we were told to open our books
to page one and to memorize three questions and their three
answers. "Wh0 mad e me.," "G0 d mad e you. ""Why dOd        1
God make me?" "To love and serve him." "What happens
when I die?" "You will live forever with God in Heaven."
For the fathers of the church there was no doubt: my soul is
eternal and I will live forever.
     Reading The Boston Globe one Sunday, I was struck by an
article about a woman facing the possibility of terminal can-
cer. The story began, "A Young Life Interrupted ... Adriana
Jenkins doubts God exists. Or fate." "When we die," she
says, "we are gone 'ashes to ashes, dust to dust.''' But she
imagines death often-the pain, floating upward, looking
down on mourners around her hospital bed, a shimmer of
light and finally nothing: "off like a light switch." This has
become the main alternative for those to whom doubt itself
has become a faith; when we die we are gone, we are nothing.
     The first funeral I ever attended was in 1968. It was for
my mother's father, my grandfather, Sam Rameau. Since
then, more than two dozen times, I have stood at the edge of
a freshly dug grave, confused, lost and wondering what to
                                 x


                         FOREWORD
think and what to feel about death, asking myself, Are there
really only two options to consider, the belief in an eternal
soul, or annihilation?
     Doubting the belief in an eternal life and dreading the
idea of oblivion, I have lived with a dull fear, a kind of cos-
mic background noise, throughout my life. Which one is
true, forever remaining as me or nothingness? Is there an
eternal soul and, if there is, will I be in heaven or in hell?
Bored forever or in bliss? Alone or with God?
     During the Buddha's life, he was questioned many times
by scholars and theologians about the opposite philosophies
of eternalism and nihilism. When asked if there was an eter-
nal soul, the Buddha replied that there is no permanent self,
When asked if we were extinguished into oblivion upon our
death, the Buddha said that we are not annihilated. He re-
jected both of these ideas.
     I have a dear friend who is a famous marine biologist.
Like many people he believes that when we die we are extin-
guished forever. He believes this not from a loss of faith or
from despair but because of his trust in science. His faith is
in the natural world, in the beauty of the unfolding universe
around him and in the ability of humans to understand and
gain knowledge of that universe.
     Thich Nhat Hanh also has an abiding faith in the ability
of humans to gain understanding. But his goal is more than
                               Xl


                         FOREWORD
the accumulation of scientific knowledge; it is the attainment
of liberation and deep personal wisdom based on pure in-
quiry. Writing in these pages from his own experience,
Thich Nhat Hanh proposes a stunning alternative to the op-
posing philosophies of an eternal soul and nihilism. He tells
us: "Since before time you have been free. Birth and death are
only doors through which we pass, sacred thresholds on our
journey. Birth and death are a game of hide-and-seek. You
have never been born and you can never die" and "Our great-
est pain is caused by our notions of coming and going." Over
and over again, he invites us to practice looking deeply so we
can know for ourselves the freedom and joy of the middle
way between a permanent self and oblivion. As a poet, he ex-
plores the paradoxes of life and gently lifts the veil of illu-
sion, allowing us, maybe for the first time in our lives, to see
that our dread of dying is caused by our own misperceptions
and misunderstandings.
     His insights into life and death are subtle and elegant,
and, like all things subtle, best appreciated slowly, in quiet
contemplation. Out of the deep wellspring of Thich Nhat
Hanh's humanity and compassion comes the balm to heal
our hearts.
                                              PRITAM SINGH
                               xu


      One
  WHERE DO
WE COME FROM?
  WHERE DO
    WE GO?


    I
   I
 I
I


In my hermitage in France there is a bush of japonica, Japan-
ese quince. The bush usually blossoms in the spring, but one
winter it had been quite warm and the flower buds had come
early. During the night a cold snap arrived and brought with
it frost. The next day while doing walking meditation, I no-
ticed that all the buds on the bush had died. I recognized this
and thought, This New Year we will not have enough flowers to decorate
the altar oj the Buddha.
     A few weeks later the weather became warm again. As I
walked in my garden I saw new buds on the japonica mani-
festing another generation of flowers. I asked the japonica
flowers: "Are you the same as the flowers that died in the frost
or are you different flowers?" The flowers replied to me: "Thay,
we are not the same and we are not different. When condi-
tions are sufficient we manifest and when conditions are not
sufficient we go into hiding. It's as simple as that."
     This is what the Buddha taught. When conditions are
sufficient things manifest. When conditions are no longer
sufficient things withdraw. They wait until the moment is
right for them to manifest again.


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     Before giving birth to me, my mother was pregnant with
another baby. She had a miscarriage, and that person wasn't
born. When I was young I used to ask the question: was that
my brother or was that me? Who was trying to manifest at
that time? If a baby has been lost it means that conditions
were not enough for him to manifest and the child has de-
cided to withdraw in order to wait for better conditions. "I
had better withdraw; I'll come back again soon, my dearest."
We have to respect his or her will. If you see the world with
eyes like this, you will suffer much less. Was it my brother
that my mother lost? Or maybe I was about to come out but
instead I said, "It isn't time yet," so I withdrew.
                      Becoming Nothing
Our greatest fear is that when we die we 'will become nothing.
Many of us believe that our entire existence is only a life span
beginning the moment we are born or conceived and ending
the moment we die. We believe that we are born from noth-
ing and that when we die we become nothing. And so we are
filled with fear of annihilation.
     The Buddha has a very different understanding of our
existence. It is the understanding that birth and death are no-
tions. They are not real. The fact that we think they are true
makes a powerful illusion that causes our suffering. The
                                 4


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
Buddha taught that there is no birth, there is no death; there
is no coming, there is no going; there is no same, there is no
different; there is no permanent self, there is no annihilation.
We only think there is. When we understand that we cannot
be destroyed, we are liberated from fear. It is a great relief,
We can enjoy life and appreciate it in a new way.
                Finding a Lost Loved One
The same thing happens when we lose any of our beloved
oQes. When conditions are not right to support life, they
withdraw. When I lost my mother I suffered a lot. When we
are only seven or eight years old it is difficult to think that
one day we will lose our mother. Eventually we grow up and
we all lose our mothers, but if you know how to practice,
when the time comes for the separation you will not suffer
too much. You will very quickly realize that your mother is
always alive within you.
     The day my mother died, I wrote in my journal, "A seri-
ous misfortune of my life has arrived." I suffered for more
than one year after the passing away of my mother. But one
night, in the highlands of Vietnam, I was sleeping in the hut
in my hermitage. I dreamed of my mother. I saw myself sit-
ting with her, and we were having a wonderfUl talk. She
looked young and beautifUl, her hair flowing down. It was so


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
pleasant to sit there and talk to her as if she had never died.
When I woke up it was about two in the morning. and I felt
very strongly that I had never lost my mother. The impres-
sion that my mother was still with me was very clear. I un-
derstood then that the idea of having lost my mother was
just an idea. It was obvious in that moment that my mother
is always alive in me.
     l opened the door and went outside. The entire hillside
was bathed in moonlight. It was a hill covered with tea
plants. and my hut was set behind the temple halfway up.
Walking slowly in the moonlight through the rows of tea
plants. I noticed my mother was still with me. She was the
moonlight caressing me as she had done so often. very ten-
der. very sweet ... wonderful! Each time my feet touched the
earth I knew my mother was there with me. I knew this body
was not mine alone but a living continuation of my mother
and my father and my grandparents and great-grandparents.
Of all my ancestors. These feet that I saw as "my" feet were
actually "our" feet. Together my mother and I were leaving
footprints in the damp soil.
     From that moment on. the idea that I had lost my
mother no longer existed. All I had to do was look at the
palm of my hand. feel the breeze on my face or the earth
under my feet to remember that my mother is always with
me. available at any time.
                               6


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
     When you lose a loved one, you suffer. But if you know
how to look deeply, you have a chance to realize that his or
her nature is truly the nature of no birth, no death. There is
manifestation and there is the cessation of manifestation in
order to have another manifestation. You have to be very
keen and very alert in order to recognize the new manifesta-
tions of just one person. But with the practice and with ef-
fort you can do it.
     So, taking the hand of someone who knows the practice,
together do walking meditation. Pay attention to all the leaves,
the flowers, the birds and the dewdrops. If you can stop and
look deeply, you will be able to recognize your beloved one
manifesting again and again in many forms. You will again
embrace the joy oflife.
               Nothing Is Born, Nothing Dies
A French scientist, whose name is Lavoisier, declared, "Rim
ne se cree, rim ne se perd." "Nothing is born, nothing dies." Al-
though he did not practice as a Buddhist but as a scientist, he
found the same truth the Buddha discovered.
     Our true nature is the nature of no birth and no death.
Only when we touch our true nature can we transcend the
fear of non-being, the fear of annihilation.
                                  7


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     The Buddha said that when conditions are sufficient
something manifests and we say it exists. When one or two
conditions fail and the thing does not manifest in the same
way, we then say it does not exist. According to the Buddha,
to qualify something as existing or not existing is wrong. In
reality, there is no such thing as totally existing or totally not
existing.
     We can see this very easily with television and radio. We
may be in a room that has no television or radio. And while
we are in that room, we may think that television programs
and radio programs do not exist in that room. But all of us
know that the space in the room is full of signals. The signals
of these programs are filling the air everywhere. We need only
one more condition, a radio or a television set, and many
forms, colors and sounds will appear. It would have been
wrong to say that the signals do not exist because we did not
have a radio or television to receive and manifest them. They
only seemed not to exist because the causes and conditions
were not enough to make the television program manifest. So
at that moment, in that room, we say they do not exist. Just
because we do not perceive something, it is not correct to say
it does not exist. It is only our notion of being and non-being
that makes us confused. It is our notion of being and non-
being that makes us think something exists or something
doesn't exist. Notions of being and non-being cannot be ap-
plied to reality.
                                 8


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
                    No Above) No Below
It is like the notion of above and below. To say they exist is
also wrong. What is below for us is above for someone else
somewhere else. Weare sitting here and we say that above is
the direction over our head and we think that the opposite
direction is below.
     People practicing sitting meditation on the other side of
the world would not agree that what we call above is above
because for them it is below. They are not sitting on their
heads. The ideas of above and below always mean to be above
something or to be below something, and the ideas of below
and above cannot be applied to the reality of the cosmos.
These are only concepts to help us relate to our environment.
They are concepts that give us a point of reference, but they
are not real. Reality is free from all concepts and ideas.
                    Trapped by a Notion
The Buddha offered an interesting parable concerning ideas
and notions. A young tradesman came home and saw that his
house had been robbed and burned by bandits. Right outside
what was left of the house, there was a small, charred body.
He thought the body belonged to his little boy. He did not
                                 9


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
know that his child was still alive. He did not know that
after having burned the house, the bandits had taken the lit-
tle boy away with them. In his state of confusion, the trades-
man believed the body he saw was his son. So he cried, he
beat his chest and pulled out his hair in grie£ Then he began
the cremation ceremony.
     This man loved his little boy so much. His son was the
raison d'etre of his life. He longed for his little boy so much
that he could not abandon the little boy's ashes even for one
moment. He made a velvet bag and put the ashes inside. He
carried the bag with him day and night, and whether he was
working or resting, he was never separated from the bag of
ashes. One night his son escaped from the robbers. He came
to the new house built by his father. He knocked excitedly
on the door at two o'clock in the morning. His father called
out as he wept, still holding the bag of ashes. "Who is there?"
     "It's me, your son!" the boy answered through the door.
     "You naughty person, you are not my boy. My child
died three months ago. I have his ashes with me right here."
The little boy continued to beat on the door and cried and
cried. He begged over and over again to come in, but his fa-
ther continued to refuse him entry. The man held firm to the
notion that his little boy was already dead and that this other
child was some heartless person who had come to torment
him. Finally, the boy left and the father lost his son forever.
     The Buddha said that if you get caught in one idea and
                                10


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
consider it to be "the truth," then you miss the chance to
know the truth. Even if the truth comes in person and knocks
at your door, you will refuse to open your mind. So if you are
committed to an idea about truth or to an idea about the con-
ditions necessary for your happiness, be careful. The first
Mindfulness Training is about freedom from views:
     Aware if the s1iffering created by janaticism and intolerance,
     we are determined not to be idolatrous about or bound to any
     doctrine, theory or ideology, even Buddhist ones. Buddhist
     teachings are guiding means to help us learn to look deeply and
     to develop our understanding and compassion. They are not
     doctrines to fight, kill or die jor.
     This is a practice to help free us from the tendency to be
dogmatic. Our world suffers so much from dogmatic atti-
tudes. The first mindfulness training is important to help us
remain free people. Freedom is above all else freedom from
our own notions and concepts. If we get caught in our no-
tions and concepts, we can make ourselves suffer and we can
also make those we love suffer.
                                          II


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
                   No Coming, No Going
For many of us, our greatest pain is caused by our notions of
coming and going. We think that the person we loved came
to us from somewhere and has now gone away somewhere.
But our true nature is the nature of no coming, no going. We
have not come from anywhere, we shall not go anywhere.
When conditions are sufficient, we manifest. When condi-
tions are no longer sufficient, we no longer manifest. It does
not mean that we do not exist. Like radio waves without a
radio, we do not manifest.
     Not only do the notions of coming and going not ex-
press reality, neither do the notions of being and non-being.
We hear these words in the Prajnaparamita Sutra: "Listen
Shariputra, all dharmas [phenomena] are marked by empti- .
ness, they are neither produced nor destroyed, neither in-
creasing nor decreasing."
     The meaning of emptiness here is very important; it
means first of all to be empty of a separate sel£ Nothing has a
separate self, and nothing exists by itsel£ If we examine things
carefully we will see that all phenomena, including ourselves,
are composites. Weare made up of other parts. Weare made
of our mother and father, our grandmothers and grandfathers,
our body, our feelings, our perceptions, our mental forma-
tions, the earth, the sun and innumerable non-self elements.
                                12


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
All these parts depend on causes and conditions. We see that
all that has existed, exists or will exist is interconnected and
interdependent. All that we see has only manifested because it
is a part of something else, of other conditions that make it
possible to manifest. All phenomena are neither produced
nor destroyed, because they are in a constant process of man-
ifesting.
     We may be intelligent enough to understand this, but to
understand it intellectually is not enough. To really under-
stand this is to be free from fear. It is to become enlightened.
It is to live in inter-being.
     We have to practice looking deeply like this to nourish
our awakened understanding of no birth and no death in our
daily lives. In this way we can realize the wonderful gift of
non-fear.
     If we just talk about inter-being as a theory, it will not
help us. We should ask: "Piece of paper, where do you come
from? Who are you? What did you come here to do? Where
are you going to go?" We can ask the flame: "Flame, where
do you come from and where will you go?" Listen to the
reply closely. The flame, the piece of paper, is replying by its
presence. We only have to look deeply and we can hear it
reply. The flame is saying: "I do not come from anywhere."
     That would be the answer of the japonica flowers also.
They were not the same and not different. They did not
come from anywhere and they did not go anywhere. If there


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
is a baby who is lost, we should not be sad. It is because there
were not sufficient causes and conditions for it to arrive at
that time. It will come again.
                 Sadness Lies in Ignorance
The Great Being Avalokiteshvara was a disciple of the Bud-
dha. One day, when he was concentrating in the course of
deep understanding, he suddenly saw that everything is with-
out a separate sel£ Seeing this, he overcame all ignorance,
which means he overcame all his suffering.
     Looking deeply, we should also see that there is no birth,
there is no death; there is no coming, there is no going; there
is no being, there is no non-being; there is no same, there is
no different.
     If we don't learn this practice, it is a terrible waste. We
can learn many practices to lessen our sadness and our suf-
fering, but the cream of enlightened wisdom is the insight of
no birth, no death. When we have this insight we will have
no more fear. We can then enjoy the immense inheritance
our ancestors have handed down to us. We should make
time to practice these deep and wonderful teachings in our
daily lives.


    WHERE DO WE COME FROM? WHERE DO WE GO?
              Respecting Our Manifestations
If you look at a friend with the eyes of a meditator, you will
see in him or her all generations of their ancestors. You will
be very respectful to them and to your own body because
you will see their body and your body as the sacred home of
all our ancestors.
     You will also see that our bodies are the source of all fu-
ture generations. We will not damage our bodies, because
that wouldn't be kind to our descendants. We do not use
drugs and we do not eat or drink things that have toxins or
that will harm our bodies. This is because our insight of
manifestation helps us to live in a healthy way, with clarity
and responsibility.
     The ideas of inside and outside are also like this. If we
say that the Buddha is in us, our parents are in us, our parents
are outside of us, or the Buddha is outside of us, these ideas
of inside and outside are not applicable. Weare caught in
ideas, especially ideas of coming and going and being and not
being. Only when we rid ourselves of all these ideas can real-
ity appear, the reality of nirvana. When all ideas of is and is
not have been extinguished, then reality will manifest itselE
                                15


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
            There Is Nothing Like Experience
We can use an example that is easy to understand, of a tan-
gerine or a durian fruit. If there is a person who has never
eaten a tangerine or a durian fruit, however many images or
metaphors you give him, you cannot describe to him the real-
ity of those fruits. You can only do one thing: give him a
direct experience. You cannot say: "Well, the durian is a lit-
tle bit like the jackfruit or like a papaya." You cannot say
anything that will describe the experience of a durian fruit.
The durian fruit goes beyond all ideas and notions. The
same is true of a tangerine. If you have never eaten a tanger-
ine, however much the other person loves you and wants to
help you understand what a tangerine tastes like, they will
never succeed by describing it. The reality of the tangerine
goes beyond ideas. Nirvana is the same; it is the reality that
goes beyond ideas. It is because we have ideas about nirvana
that we suffer. Direct experience is the only way.
                                16


      Two
THE R.EAL FEAR.


  I
  I
I
I


We are afraid of death, we are afraid of separation, and we
are afraid of nothingness. In the West, people are very afraid
of nothingness. When they hear about emptiness, people are
also very afraid, but emptiness just means the extinction of
ideas. Emptiness is not the opposite of existence. It is not
nothingness or annihilation. The idea of existence has to be
removed and so does the idea of nonexistence. Emptiness is a
tool to help us.
     Reality has nothing to do with existence and nonexis-
tence. When Shakespeare says: "To be, or not to be-that is
the question," the Buddha answers: "To be or not to be is
not the question." To be and not to be are just two ideas op-
posing each other. But they are not reality, and they do not
describe reality.
     Not only does awakened insight remove the notion of
permanence, but it also removes the notion of imperma-
nence. The notion of emptiness is the same. Emptiness is an
instrument, and if you are caught in the notion of emptiness
you are lost. The Buddha said in the Ratnakuta Sutra: "If you
are caught by the notion of being and non-being, then the


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
notion of emptiness can help you to get free. But if you are
caught by the notion of emptiness, there's no hope." The
teaching on emptiness is a tool helping you to get the real in-
sight of emptiness, but if you consider the tool as the insight,
you just get caught in an idea.
      If you have a notion about nirvana, that notion should
be removed. Nirvana is empty of all notions, including the
notion of nirvana. If you are caught in the notion of nirvana,
you have not touched nirvana yet. This deep insight and dis-
covery of the Buddha took him beyond fear, beyond anxiety
and suffering and beyond birth and death.
                    Burning Our Notions
When you have a match, you have the condition to make a
fire. If the flame you make with the match lasts long enough,
it will also burn up the match. The match gives rise to the
fire, but the fire itself burns up the match; the teaching of
impermanence is the same. It helps us to have the awakened
understanding of impermanence, and the insight of imper-
manence is what will burn up our idea of impermanence.
      We have to go beyond the idea of permanence, but we
also have to go beyond the idea of impermanence. Then we
can be in touch with nirvana. The same is true of no self No
self is the match; it helps to give rise to the fire of the insight
                                20


                         THE REAL FEAR
of no selE It is the awakened understanding of no self that
will burn up the match of no selE
     To practice is not to store up a lot of ideas about no self,
impermanence, nirvana or anything else; that is just the work
of a cassette recorder. To speak about and distribute ideas is
not the study or practice of Buddhism. We can go to a uni-
versity to study Buddhism, but we will learn only theories
and ideas. We want to go beyond ideas to have real insight,
which will burn up all our ideas and help us to be free.
                       Where Is Nirvana?
Look at a quarter. One side of it is called heads, the other
side is called tails; they cannot exist without each other. The
metal from which they are made contains them both. With-
out the metal the two sides would not exist. The three ele-
ments, heads, tails and metal, inter-are. The metal we could
describe as something like nirvana, and the heads and tails as
something like the manifestation of impermanence and no
selE Through the appearance of either the tails or the heads,
you can touch and recognize the presence of the metal. Simi-
larly by looking deeply into the nature of impermanence and
no self, you can also touch the nature of nirvana.
     The ultimate dimension of nirvana cannot be separated
from the historical dimension. When you touch deeply the
                                21


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
historical dimension, you also touch the ultimate dimension.
The ultimate dimension is always in you. For a practitioner
it's very important to touch his or her own nature of imper-
manence and non-self. If he is successfUl he will touch the
nature of nirvana and attain non-fear. Now he can ride on
the waves of birth and death, smiling serenely.
        The Historical and Ultimate Dimensions
We look upon reality in our daily lives through the historical
dimension, but we can also look upon the same reality in the ul-
timate dimension. Reality can be manifested in the historical
dimension, or it can be manifested in the ultimate dimension.
Weare similar. We have our daily and historical concerns, but
each of us also has our ultimate concerns.
     When we look for God or nirvana or the deepest kind of
peace, we are concerned about the ultimate. Weare not only
concerned with the facts of daily life-fame, profit, or our
position in society and our projects-but we are also con-
cerned about our true nature. To meditate deeply is to begin
to fUlfill our ultimate concern.
                               22


                      THE REAL FEAR
                      Waves A re Water
When you look at the surface of the ocean, you can see
waves coming up and going down. You can describe these
waves in terms of high or low, big or small, more vigorous or
less vigorous, more beautiful or less beautiful. You can de-
scribe a wave in terms of beginning and end, birth and death.
That can be compared to the historical dimension. In the
historical dimension, we are concerned with birth and death,
more powerful, less powerful, more beautiful, less beautiful,
beginning and end and so on.
     Looking deeply, we can also see that the waves are at the
same time water. A wave may like to seek its own true nature.
The wave might suffer from fear, from complexes. A wave
may say, "I am not as big as the other waves," "I am op-
pressed," "I am not as beautiful as the other waves," "I have
been born and I have to die." The wave may suffer from
these things, these ideas. But if the wave bends down and
touches her true nature she will realize that she is water.
Then her fear and complexes will disappear.
     Water is free from the birth and death of a wave. Water
is free from high and low, more beautiful and less beautiful.
You can talk in terms of more beautiful or less beautiful,
high or low, only in terms of waves. As far as water is con-
cerned, all these concepts are invalid.


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
     Our true nature is the nature of no birth and no death.
We do not have to go anywhere in order to touch our true
nature. The wave does not have to look for water because she
is water. We do not have to look for God, we do not have to
look for our ultimate dimension or nirvana, because we are
nirvana, we are God.
     You are what you are looking for. You are already what
you want to become. You can say to the wave, "My dearest
wave, you are water. You don't have to go and seek water.
Your nature is the nature of nondiscrimination, of no birth,
of no death, of no being and of no non-being."
     Practice like a wave. Take the time to look deeply into
yourself and recognize that your nature is the nature of no-
birth and no-death. You can break through to freedom and
fearlessness this way. This method of practice will help us to
live without fear, and it will help us to die peacefUlly without
regret.
     If you carry within yourself deep grief, if you have lost a
loved one, if you are inhabited by fear of death, oblivion and
annihilation, please take up this teaching and begin to prac-
tice it. If you practice well, you will be capable of looking at
the cloud, the rose, the pebble or your child with the kind of
eyes the Buddha has transmitted to us. You will touch the no-
birth, no-death, no-coming, no-going nature of reality. This
can liberate you from your fear, from your anxiety and your
sorrow. Then you can truly have the kind of peace that will


                       THE REAL FEAR
make you strong and stable, smiling as events happen. Living
this way will allow you to help many people around you.
         Where Were You Before You Were Born?
Sometimes people ask you: "When is your birthday?" But
you might ask yourself a more interesting question: "Before
that day which is called my birthday, where was I?"
     Ask a cloud: "What is your date of birth? Before you
were born, where were you?"
     If you ask the cloud, "How old are you? Can you give
me your date of birth?" you can listen deeply and you may
hear a reply. You can imagine the cloud being born. Before
being born it was the water on the ocean's surface. Or it was
in the river and then it became vapor. It was also the sun be-
cause the sun makes the vapor. The wind is there too, help-
ing the water to become a cloud. The cloud does not come
from nothing; there has been only a change in form. It is not
a birth of something out of nothing.
     Sooner or later the cloud will change into rain or snow
or ice. If you look deeply into the rain, you can see the cloud.
The cloud is not lost; it is transformed into rain, and the rain
is transformed into grass and the grass into cows and then to
milk and then into the ice cream you eat. Today if you eat an
ice cream, give yourself time to look at the ice cream and say:


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
"Hello, cloud! I recognize you." By doing that, you have in-
sight and understanding into the real nature of the ice cream
and the cloud. You can also see the ocean, the river, the heat,
the sun, the grass and the cow in the ice cream.
     Looking deeply, you do not see a real date of birth and
you do not see a real date of death for the cloud. All that hap-
pens is that the cloud transfonus into rain or snow. There is
no real death because there is always a continuation. A cloud
continues the ocean, the river and the heat of the sun, and the
rain continues the cloud.
     Before it was born, the cloud was already there, so today,
when you drink a glass of milk or a cup of tea or eat an ice
cream, please follow your breathing. Look into the tea or the
ice cream and say hello to the cloud.
     The Buddha took the time to look deeply and so can we.
The Buddha was not a God; he was a human being like
us. He suffered, but he practiced, and that is why he over-
came his suffering. He had deep understanding, wisdom and
compassion. That is why we say he is our teacher and our
brother.
     If we are afraid of death it is because we have not under-
stood that things do not really die. People say that the Bud-
dha is dead, but it is not true. The Buddha is still alive. If we
look around us we can see the Buddha in many fonus. The
Buddha is in you because you have been able to look deeply
and see that things are not really born and that they do not
                                26


                         THE REAL FEAR
die. We can say that you are a new fonn of the Buddha, a
continuation of the Buddha. Do not underestimate yoursel£
Look around you a little bit and you will see continuations
of the Buddha everywhere.
                    Am I Yesterday's Me?
I have a photograph of myself when I was a boy of sixteen. Is
it a photograph of me? I am not really sure. Who is this boy
in the photograph? Is it the same person as me or is it an-
other person? Look deeply before you reply.
     There are many people who say that the boy in the pho-
tograph and I are the same. If that boy is the same as I am,
why does he look so different? Is that boy still alive or has he
died? He is not the same as I am and he is also not different.
Some people look at that photograph and think the young
boy there is no longer around.
     A person is made of body, feelings, perceptions, mental
fonnations and consciousness, and all of these have changed in
me since that photograph was taken. The body of the boy
in the photograph is not the same as my body, now that I am
in my seventies. The feelings are different, and the perceptions
are very different. It is just as if! am a completely different per-
son from that boy, but if the boy in the photograph did not
exist, then I would not exist either.
                                   27


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     I am a continuation like the rain is the continuation of
the cloud. When you look deeply into the photograph, you
can see me already as an old man. You do not have to wait
fifty-five years. When the lemon tree is in flower, you may
not see any fruit, but if you look deeply you can see that the
fruit is already there. You just need one more condition to
bring forth the lemons: time. Lemons are already there in the
lemon tree. Look at the tree and you only see branches,
leaves and flowers. But if the lemon tree has time it will ex-
press itself in lemons.
                    Sunflowers in April
If you come to France in April, you will not see any sunflow-
ers. But in July the area around Plum Village has so many
sunflowers. Where are the sunflowers in April? If you come
to Plum Village in April and look deeply, you will see sun-
flowers. The farmers have ploughed the land and sown the
seed, and the flowers are just waiting for one more condition
to show themselves. They are waiting for the warmth of May
and June. The sunflowers are there, but they have not fully
manifested.
     Look deeply at a box of matches. Do you see a flame in
it? If you do, you are already enlightened. When we look


                        THE REAL FEAR
deeply at a box of matches, we see that the flame is there. It
needs only the movement of someone's fingers to manifest.
We say: "Dear flame, I know you are there. Now I shall help
you express yourself."
     The flame has always been in the box of matches and
also in the air. If there were no oxygen, the flame could not
express itself. If you lit a candle and then covered the flame
with something, the flame would go out for lack of oxygen.
The survival of the flame depends on oxygen. We cannot say
that the flame is inside the box of matches or that the flame
is outside the box of matches. The flame is everywhere in
space, time and consciousness. The flame is everywhere, wait-
ing to manifest itself. and we are one of the conditions that
will help the flame to manifest. However, if we blow on the
flame we shall help the flame stop showing itself. Our breath,
when we blow on the flame, is a condition that stops the
manifestation of the flame in its flame form.
     We can light two candles from the match and then blow
out the flame on the match. Do you think the flame from the
match has died? The flame is not of the nature to be born or
to die. The question is, is the flame on the two candles the
same flame or two different flames? It is not the same and it
is not different. Now another question: is the flame of the
match dead? It is both dead and not dead. Its nature is not to
die and not to be born. If we leave the candle burning for an


                   NO DEATH, NO FEAR
hour, will the flame remain the same or become another
flame? The wick, the wax and the oxygen are always chang-
ing. The part of the wick and the wax that is burning is al-
ways transforming. If these things transform, the flame must
change too. So the flame is not the same, but it also is not
different.
      Being Is Not the Opposite oj Annihilation
We have an idea of being that it is the opposite of not
being. These ideas are no more solid than ideas of right
and left. Look at a pen. Can we remove totally its right-
hand side? If we use a knife and cut away half of the pen,
the part that remains still has a right-hand side. Political
parties of the right and the left are immortal-they cannot
be removed. As long as there is a right wing, there will be a
left wing.
     Therefore those on the left of the political spectrum
should desire the eternal presence of those on the right. If
we remove the right, we have to remove the left at the same
time. The Buddha said: "This is because that is. This mani-
fests because that has manifested." This is the Buddha's
teaching concerning the creation of the world. It is called
the teaching on co-arising. The flame is there because the


                       THE REAL FEAR
matches are there. If the matches were not there, the flame
would not be there.
                  The Answer Lies Within
Where does the flame come from? What is its origin? We
should look deeply into this question. Do you need to sit in
the lotus position to find the answer? I am sure that the an-
swer is already in you. It is just waiting for one more condi-
tion to manifest itself. The Buddha said that everyone has
Buddha nature in them. Buddha nature is the ability to un-
derstand and touch our real nature. The answer is already in
you. A teacher cannot give you the answer. A teacher can
help you be in touch with the awakened nature, the great un-
derstanding and compassion in you. The Buddha invites you
to be in touch with the wisdom that is already in you.
    Many of us ask: "Where do you go when you die? What
happens when you die?" We have friends who have lost
someone they love and they ask: "Where is my beloved one
now? Where has she gone now?" Philosophers ask: "Where
does man come from? Where does the cosmos or the world
come from?"
    When we look deeply, we see that when all the condi-
tions are sufficient something will manifest. What manifests


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
does not come from anywhere. And when a manifestation
ceases, it does not go anywhere.
                           Creation
"To create" seems to mean that from nothing you suddenly
have something. I prefer the use of the expression "manifes-
tation" to the word "creation." Look deeply, and you can
understand creation in terms of manifestation. Just as we can
understand a cloud as a manifestation of something that has
always been there, and rain as the end of the cloud manifesta-
tion, we can understand human beings, and even everything
around us, as a manifestation that has come from somewhere
and will go nowhere. Manifestation is not the opposite of
destruction. It simply changes form. Understanding our lives
and the cosmos as a manifestation can bring us tremendous
peace. If you are grieving over the loss of a loved one, this is
an invitation to look deeply and to heal your pain.
     There are theologians who have said that God is the
ground of being, but what being? It is not the being that is
opposed to non-being. If it is the notion of being as opposed
to non-being, then that is not God. God transcends all no-
tions, including the notions of creation and destruction. If
you look deeply at the notion of creation with the insight of


                       THE REAL FEAR
manifestation in mind, you will discover the depth of the
teaching on creation. You will discover that nothing is born
and nothing dies. There is only manifestation.
                        Finding Relief
We come to spiritual practice, to a church, a synagogue, a
mosque or a meditation center, to find relief from pain and
sorrow. But the greatest relief can only be obtained when we
are capable of touching the ultimate dimension. In Judaism
and in Christianity you may call that dimension God. God is
our true nature, the true nature of no birth, no death. That is
why if you know how to trust God, to trust your true nature,
you will lose your fear and sorrow.
     In the beginning you might think of God as a person,
but a person is the opposite of a non-person. If you think of
God in terms of notions and concepts, you have not yet dis-
covered the reality of God. God transcends all our notions.
God is neither a person nor a non-person. A wave in her ig-
norance is subject to the fear of birth, death, high, low, more
or less beautiful, and the jealousy of others. But if a wave is
able to touch her true nature, the nature of water, and know
that she is water, then all her fear and jealousy will vanish.
Water doesn't undergo birth and death, high and low.
                               H


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
                            Causes
When we look at things like a flower, a table or a house, we
think that a house has to be made by someone and a table
has to be made by someone in order to be there. Our ten-
dency is to look for a cause that has given birth to the house,
a cause that has given birth to the table. We come to the
conclusion that the cause of the house must be the house
builder: the mason or the carpenter. What is the cause of the
table? Who created the table? A carpenter. Who is the cre-
ator of the flower? Is it the earth or the farmer or the
gardener?
     In our minds we think very simply in terms of cause. We
think that one cause is enough to bring about what is there.
With the practice of looking deeply we find out that one
cause can never be enough in order to bring about an effect.
The carpenter is not the only cause of the table. If the car-
penter does not have things like nails, saw, wood, time and
space, food to eat, a father and mother who brought him to
life and a multitude of conditions, he would not be able to
bring the table into being. The causes are actually infinite.
     When we look at the flower we see the same thing. The
gardener is only one of the causes. There must be the soil,
the sunshine, the cloud, the compost, the seed and many,
many other things. If you look deeply, you will see that the
                               34


                        THE REAL FEAR
whole cosmos has come together in order to help the flower
to manifest. If you look deeply into a piece of carrot that you
eat at lunch, you will see that the whole cosmos has come to-
gether in order to help manifest that piece of carrot.
     If we continue to look deeply, we see that a cause is at
the same time an effect. The gardener is one of the causes
that has helped to manifest the flower, but the gardener is
also an effect. The gardener has manifested because of other
causes: ancestors, father, mother, teacher, job, society, food,
medicine and shelter. Like the carpenter, he is not only a
cause, he is also an effect.
     Looking deeply, we find that every cause is at the same
time an effect. There cannot be something that we can call
"pure cause." There are many things we can discover with
the practice of looking deeply, and if we are not bound to any
dogma or concept we will be free to make our discoveries.
                        No Pure Cause
When the Buddha was asked, "What is the cause of every-
thing?" he answered with very simple words. He said, "This
is, because that is." It means that everything relies on every-
thing else in order to manifest. A flower has to rely on non-
flower elements in order to manifest. If you look deeply into
the flower, you can recognize non-flower elements. Looking
                                35


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
into the flower, you recognize the element sunshine; that is a
non-flower element. Without sunshine, a flower cannot man-
ifest. Looking at the flower, you recognize the element cloud;
that is a non-flower element. Without clouds, the flower can-
not manifest. Other elements are essential, such as minerals,
soil, the farmer and so on; a multitude of non-flower elements
has come together in order to help the flower manifest.
     This is why I prefer the expression "manifestation" to the
word" creation." This does not mean that we should not use
the word "creation." Of course we can do so, but we should
understand that creation does not mean making something
out of nothing. Creation is not something that is destroyed
and can become nothing. I very much like the term "Won-
derful Becoming." It is close to the true meaning of creation.


      Three
THE PRACTICE
 OF LOOK.INC
    DEEPLY




An    authentic practices of the Buddha carry within them-
selves three essential teachings called the Dharma Seals. These
three teachings of the Buddha are impermanence, no self and
nirvana. Just as all-important legal documents have the mark
or signature of a witness, all genuine practices of the Buddha
bear the mark of these three teachings.
     If we look into the first Dharma Seal, impermanence, we
see that it doesn't just mean that everything changes. By
looking into the nature of things, we can see that nothing
remains the same for even two consecutive moments. Be-
cause nothing remains unchanged from moment to moment,
it therefore has no fixed identity or permanent sel£ So in
the teaching of impermanence we always see the lack of an
unchanging sel£ We call this "no sel£" It is because things
are always transforming and have no self that freedom is
possible.
     The third Dharma Seal is nirvana. This means solidity
and freedom, freedom from all ideas and notions. The word
"nirvana" literally means "the extinction of all concepts."
Looking deeply into impermanence leads to the discovery of
                                39


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
no sel£ The discovery of no self leads to nirvana. Nirvana is
the Kingdom of God.
                        Impermanence
The practice and understanding of impermanence is not just
another description of reality. It is a tool that helps us in our
transformation, healing and emancipation.
    Impermanence means that everything changes and that
nothing remains the same in any consecutive moments. And
although things change every moment, they still cannot be
accurately described as the same or as different from what
they were a moment ago.
    When we bathe in the river today that we bathed in yes-
terday, is it the same river? Heraclitus said that we couldn't
step into the same river twice. He was right. The water in the
river today is completely different from the water we bathed
in yesterday. Yet it is the same river. When Confucius was
standing on the bank of a river watching it flow by, he said:
"Oh, it flows like that day and night, never ending."
     The insight of impermanence helps us to go beyond all
concepts. It helps us to go beyond same and different and
coming and going. It helps us to see that the river is not the
same river but is also not different either. It shows us that the


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
flame we lit on our bedside candle before we went to bed is not
the same flame that is burning the next morning. The flame on
the table is not two flames, but it is not one flame either.
       Impermanence Makes Everything Possible
Weare often sad and suffer a lot when things change, but
change and impermanence have a positive side. Thanks to
impermanence, everything is possible. Life itself is possible.
If a grain of com is not impermanent, it can never be trans-
formed into a stalk of com. If the stalk were not imperma-
nent, it could never provide us with the ear of com we eat. If
your daughter is not impermanent, she cannot grow up to
become a woman. Then your grandchildren would never
manifest. So instead of complaining about impermanence,
we should say, "Warm welcome and long live imperma-
nence." We should be happy. When we can see the miracle
of impermanence, our sadness and suffering will pass.
     Impermanence should also be understood in the light of
inter-being. Because all things inter-are, they are constantly
influencing one another. It is said that a butterfly's wings
flapping on one side of the planet can affect the weather on
the other side. Things cannot stay the same because they are
influenced by everything else, everything that is not itsel£


                   NO DEATH, NO FEAR
                 Practicing Impermanence
All of us can understand impermanence with our intellect,
but this is not yet true understanding. Our intellect alone
will not lead us to freedom. It will not lead us to enlighten-
ment. When we are solid and we concentrate, we can practice
looking deeply. And when we look deeply and see the nature
of impermanence, we can then be concentrated on this deep
insight. This is how the insight of impermanence becomes
part of our being. It becomes our daily experience. We have
to maintain the insight of impermanence in order to be able
to see and live impermanence all the time. If we can use im-
permanence as an object of our meditation, we will nourish
the understanding of impermanence in such a way that it will
live in us every day. With this practice, impermanence be-
comes a key that opens the door of reality.
     We also cannot uncover the insight into impermanence
for only a moment and then cover it up and see everything as
permanent again. Most of the time we behave with our chil-
dren as though they will always be at home with us. We
never think that in three or four years' time they will leave us
to marry and have their own families. Therefore we do not
value the moments our children are with us.
     I know many parents whose children, when they are
eighteen or nineteen years old, leave home and live on their


            THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
own. The parents lose their children and feel very sorry for
themselves. Yet the parents did not value the moments they
had with their children. The same is true of husbands and
wives. You think that your spouse will be there for the whole
of your life, but how can you be so sure? We really have no
idea where our partners will be in twenty or thirty years' time
or even tomorrow. It is very important to remember every
day the practice of impermanence.
             Seeing Emotions Through the Eyes
                         oj Impermanence
When somebody says something that makes you angry and
you wish they would go away, please look deeply with the
eyes of impermanence. If he or she were gone, what would
you really feel? Would you be happy or would you weep?
Practicing this insight can be very helpful. There is a gatha, or
poem, that we can use to help us:
    Angry in the ultimate dimension
    I close my eyes and look deeply.
     Three hundred years from now
     Where will you be and where shall I be?
    When we are angry, what do we usually do? We shout,
scream, and try to blame someone else for our problems. But
                                     43


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
looking at anger with the eyes of impermanence, we can stop
and breathe. Angry at each other in the ultimate dimension,
we close our eyes and look deeply. We try to see three hun-
dred years into the future. What will you be like? What will
I be like? Where will you be? Where will I be? We need only
to breathe in and out, look at our future and at the other per-
son's future. We do not need to look as far as three hundred
years. It could be fifty or sixty years from now when we have
both passed away.
     Looking at the future, we see that the other person is
very precious to us. When we know we can lose them at any
moment, we are no longer angry. We want to embrace her or
him and say: "How wonderful, you are still alive. I am so
happy. How could I be angry with you? Both of us have to
die someday, and while we are still alive and together it is
foolish to be angry at each other."
     The reason we are foolish enough to make ourselves suf-
fer and make the other person suffer is that we forget that we
and the other person are impermanent. Someday when we
die we will lose all our possessions, our power, our family,
everything. Our freedom, peace and joy in the present mo-
ment is the most important thing we have. But without an
awakened understanding of impermanence, it is not possible
to be happy.
     Some people do not even want to look at a person when
                                44


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
the person is alive, but when the person dies they write elo-
quent obituaries and make offerings of flowers. At that point
the person has died and cannot really enjoy the fragrance of
the flowers anymore. If we really understood and remem-
bered that life was impermanent, we would do everything we
could to make the other person happy right here and right
now. If we spend twenty-four hours being angry at our
beloved, it is because we are ignorant of impermanence.
    "Angry in the ultimate dimension/I close my eyes." I
close my eyes in order to practice visualization of my beloved
one hundred or three hundred years from now. When you
visualize yourself and your beloved in three hundred years'
time, you just feel so happy that you are alive today and that
your dearest is alive today. You open your eyes and all your
anger has gone. You open your arms to embrace the other
person and you practice: "Breathing in you are alive, breath-
ing out I am so happy." When you close your eyes to visual-
ize yourself and the other person in three hundred years'
time, you are practicing the meditation on impermanence. In
the ultimate dimension, anger does not exist.
    Hatred is also impermanent. Although we may be con-
sumed with hatred at this moment, if we know that hatred is
impermanent, we can do something to change it. A practi-
tioner can take resentment and hatred and help it to disappear.
Just like with anger, we close our eyes and think, Where will we
                               45


                        NO DEATH. NO FEAR
be in three hundred years? With the understanding of hatred in the
ultimate dimension, it can evaporate in an instant.
               Let Impermanence Nurture Love
Because we are ignorant and forget about impermanence, we
don't nurture our love properly. When we first married, our
love was great. We thought that if we did not have each
other we would not be able to live one more day. Because we
did not know how to practice impermanence, after one or
two years our love changed to frustration and anger. Now we
wonder how we can survive one more day if we have to re-
main with the person we once loved so much. We decide
there is no alternative: we want a divorce. If we live with the
understanding of impermanence, we will cultivate and nur-
ture our love. Only then will it last. You have to nourish and
look after your love for it to grow.
                               No Self
Impermanence is looking at reality from the point of view of
time. No self is looking at reality from the point of view of
space. They are two sides of reality. No self is a manifesta-


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
tion of impermanence, and impermanence is a manifestation
of no self. If things are impermanent, they are without a sep-
arate selE If things are without a separate self, they are imper-
manent. Impermanence means being transformed at every
moment. This is reality. And since there is nothing unchang-
ing, how can there be a permanent self, a separate self? When
we say "self," we mean something that is always itself, un-
changing day after day. But nothing is like that. Our body is
impermanent, our emotions are impermanent and our per-
ceptions are impermanent. Our anger, our sadness, our love,
our hatred and our consciousness are also impermanent.
     So what permanent thing is there that we can call a self?
The piece of paper on which these words are written does
not have a separate selE It can only be present when the
clouds, the forest, the sun, the earth, the people who make
the paper, and the machines are present. If those things are
not present, the paper cannot be present. And if we bum the
paper, where is the self of paper?
     Nothing can exist by itself alone. It has to depend on
every other thing. That is called inter-being. To be means to
inter-be. The paper inter-is with the sunshine and with the
forest. The flower cannot exist by itself alone; it has to inter-
be with soil, rain, weeds and insects. There is no being; there
is only inter-being.
     Looking deeply into a flower, we see that the flower is
                               47


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
made of non-flower elements. We can describe the flower as
being fUll of everything. There is nothing that is not present
in the flower. We see sunshine, we see the rain, we see clouds,
we see the earth, and we also see time and space in the flower.
A flower, like everything else, is made entirely of non-flower
elements. The whole cosmos has come together in order to
help the flower manifest herself, The flower is fUll of every-
thing except one thing: a separate self, a separate identity.
      The flower cannot be by herself alone. The flower has to
inter-be with the sunshine, the cloud and everything in the
cosmos. If we understand being in terms of inter-being, then
we are much closer to the truth. Inter-being is not being and
it is not non-being. Inter-being means being empty of a sepa-
rate identity, empty of a separate self,
      No self also means emptiness, a technical term in Bud-
dhism that means the absence of a separate self, Weare of
the nature of no self, but that does not mean that we are not
here. It does not mean that nothing exists. A glass can be
empty or fUll of tea, but in order to be either empty or full,
the glass has to be there. So emptiness does not mean non-
being, and it does not mean being either. It transcends all
concepts. If you touch deeply the nature of impermanence,
no self and inter-being, you touch the ultimate dimension,
the nature of nirvana.


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
                         Who Are We?
We think of our body as our self or belonging to our selE We
think of our body as me or mine. But if you look deeply, you
see that your body is also the body of your ancestors, of your
parents, of your children and of their children. So it is not a
"me," it is not a "mine." Your body is fUll of everything else-
limitless non-body elements-except one thing: a separate
existence.
     Impermanence has to be seen in the light of emptiness,
of inter-being and of non-selE These things are not negative.
Emptiness is wonderful. Nagarjuna, the famous Buddhist
teacher of the second century, said, "Thanks to emptiness,
everything is possible."
     You can see non-self in impermanence, and imperma-
nence in non-selE You can say that impermanence is non-self
seen from the angle of time, and non-self is impermanence seen
from the angle of space. They are the same thing. That is
why impermanence and non-self inter-are. If you do not see
impermanence in non-self, that is not non-selE If you do not
see non-self in impermanence, that's not really imperma-
nence. But that is not all. You have to see nirvana in imper-
manence and you have to see nirvana in non-selE If I draw a
line, on one side there will be impermanence and non-self, on
the other side there will be nirvana. That line may be helpful,
                                49


                   NO DEATH. NO FEAR
although it could also be misleading. Nirvana means going
beyond all concepts, even the concepts of no self and imper-
manence. If we have nirvana in no self and in impermanence
it means that we are not caught in no self and impermanence
as ideas.
                Clones: No Permanent Self
If you take three cells from my body to make clones and
make three children from these cells, all of them will have the
genetic inheritance of my blood family and myself.
     But we all have one more inheritance. The body we in-
herit from our family is nature. We also have an inheritance
from our environment. That is nurture. So imagine that we
put these three clones into three different environments. If
one of the children is put into an environment of drugs and
gambling, he will probably become a person who enjoys
drugs and gambling. He will not be a Buddhist monk like I
am now. If you put another cloned child into an environ-
ment of business and send him to a business school, he will
probably become a businessman. This would occur even
though the clones will all have the same genetic inheritance
as I do. But I have been penetrated by the Buddha dharma.
The teachings of the Buddha and the practice will not be wa-
tered by business school. The seeds of selling, buying and
                              50


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
business will be watered. That clone may become a business-
man. Although the eyes, nose and ears will look just like me,
this clone will be nothing like me.
     Let us say that we allow the third clone to become a
monk. We put him in the Deer Park Monastery to be brought
up by monks and nuns. Every day he hears the sutras and does
walking meditation. That child will be more like the monk I
am today.
     Nurture is extremely important. If you make three clones
or three thousand clones, the particular manifestation of the
clone depends on the conditions that nurture that clone; the
thinking, the love, the hate, the studying and the work that
surround him or her. Imagine if there are people who are
afraid to let me go and they say: "Please give us a cell for us
to clone." If I were to agree, I would also have to say: "Well,
please let that clone be in a monastery like the Deer Park
Monastery in California, or Maple Forest Monastery in V er-
mont; otherwise, he will suffer."
                           Nirvana
Impermanence and no self are not rules to follow given to us
by the Buddha. They are keys to open the door of reality.
The idea of permanence is wrong, so the teaching on imper-
manence helps us correct our view of permanence. If we get


                       NO DEATH, NO FEAR
  caught in the idea of impermanence, we have not realized
  nirvana. The idea of self is wrong, so we use the idea of non-
  self to cure it. If we are caught in the idea of non-self, then
  that is not good for us either. Impermanence and no self are
  keys to the practice. They are not absolute truths. We do not
  die for them or kill for them.
       In Buddhism there are no ideas or prejudices that we kill
  for. We do not kill people simply because they do not accept
  our religion. The teachings of the Buddha are skillful means;
  they are not absolute truth. So we have to say that imperma-
  nence and no self are skillful means to help us come toward
  the truth; they are not absolute truth. The Buddha said: "My
  teachings are a finger pointing to the moon. Do not get
  caught in thinking that the finger is the moon. It is because
  of the finger that you can see the moon."
       No self and impermanence are means to understand the
  truth; they are not the truth itself. They are instruments; they
  are not the ultimate truth. Impermanence is not a doctrine
  that you should feel you have to die for. You would never
. put someone in prison because they contradict you. You are
  not using one concept against another concept. These means
  are to lead us to the ultimate truth. Buddhism is a skillful
  path to help us; it is not a path of fanatics. Buddhists can
  never go to war, shedding blood and killing thousands of
  people on behalf of religion.
       Because impermanence contains within herself the nature


          THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
of nirvana, you are safe from being caught in an idea. When
you study and practice this teaching, you free yourself from
notions and concepts, including the concept of permanence
and impermanence. This way, we arrive at freedom from suf-
fering and fear. This is nirvana, the kingdom of God.
                   Exti ncti on oj Concept
Weare scared because of our notions of birth and death, in-
creasing and decreasing, being and non-being. Nirvana means
extinction of all notions and ideas. If we can become free from
these notions, we can to.uch the peace of our true nature.
     There are eight basic concepts that serve to fuel our fear.
They are the notions of birth and death, coming and going,
the same and different, being and non-being. These notions
keep us from being happy. The teaching given to counteract
these notions is called "the eight no's," which are no birth,
no death, no coming, no going, not the same, not different,
no being, no non-being.
              Ending Notions oj Happiness
Each of us has a notion of how we can be happy. It would be
very helpful if we took the time to reconsider our notions of
                                53


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
happiness. We could make a list of what we think we need to
be happy: "I can only be happy if ..." Write down the things
you want and the things you do not want. Where did these
ideas come from? Are they reality? Or are they only your no-
tions? If you are committed to a particular notion of happi-
ness, you do not have much chance to be happy.
     Happiness arrives from many directions. If you have a no-
tion that it comes only from one direction, you will miss all of
these other opportunities because you want happiness to
come only from the direction you want. You say, "I would
rather die than marry anyone but her. I would rather die than
lose my job, my reputation. I cannot be happy if I don't get
that degree or that promotion or that house." You have put
many conditions on your happiness. And then, even if you do
have all your conditions met, you still won't be happy. You
will just keep creating new conditions for your happiness.
You will still want the higher degree, the better job and the
more beautifUl house.
     A government can also believe that they know the only
way to make a nation prosper and be happy. That govern-
ment and nation may commit itself to that ideology for one
hundred years or more. During that time its citizens can suf-
fer so much. Anyone who disagrees or dares to speak against
the government's ideas will be locked up. They might even
be considered insane. You can transform your nation into a
prison because you are committed to an ideology.
                              54


           THE PRACTICE OF LOOKING DEEPLY
     Please remember that your notions of happiness may be
very dangerous. The Buddha said happiness can only be pos-
sible in the here and now. So go back and examine deeply
your notions and ideas of happiness. You may recognize that
the conditions of happiness that are already there in your life
are enough. Then happiness can be instantly yours.
                              55




      Four
TRANSFORMING
  GRIEF AND
     FEAR




    THE CLOUD
    As afree person I can always come and go,
    Not caught in ideas oj is and is not.
    Not caught in ideas oj being and non-being
    Let your steps be leisurely.
     Waxing or waning the moon is always the moon
     The wind is still flying. Can you feel it my dear?
    Bringing the rain from '!far to nourish the nearby cloud
    Drops oj sunshine fall from on high to earth below
    And the lap oj earth touches the clear vault oj the sky.
                                    - THICH NHA THANH
    On a beautiful sunny day, you look up into the sky and
see a nice, puffy cloud floating through. You admire its
shape, the way the light faIls upon its many folds and the
shadow it casts on the green field. You fall in love with this
cloud. You want it to stay with you and keep you happy. But
then the shape and color change. More clouds join with it,
the sky becomes dark, and it begins to rain. The cloud is no
                                     59


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
longer apparent to you. It has become rain. You begin to cry
for the return of your beloved cloud.
     You would not cry if you knew that by looking deeply
into the rain you would still see the cloud.
     In Buddhism there is the teaching of signlessness (ani-
mitta). "Sign" means the outer form or appearance of things.
The practice of signIessness is the practice of not being fooled
by the outer form or the appearance of things. When we un-
derstand animitta, we understand that appearance is not all of
reality.
     When a cloud transforms itself into rain you can look
deeply into the rain and see that the cloud is still there,
laughing and smiling at you. This makes you happy, and you
are able to stop crying because you are no longer attached to
the appearance of the cloud. If you are struck down by your
grief and you continue to cry for a long time, it is because
you have been left behind, caught in the form or sign of the
cloud. You are caught in an appearance from the past and
you are not able to see the new form. You have not been able
to follow the cloud as it transforms into rain or snow.
     If you have lost someone and if you have cried so very
much, please accept the invitation of the Buddha. Look
deeply and recognize that the nature of your beloved is the
nature of no birth, no death, no coming, no going. This is
the teaching of the Buddha concerning our true nature.
                               60


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
                       Transformation
Let us look into the birth of a cloud. You can visualize the
heat, you can see the vapor, you can see the fonnation of the
cloud in the sky. You know where the cloud has come from.
We can understand the conditions that have helped the
cloud to manifest in the sky. Our observation and our prac-
tice of looking deeply can help. Science can also tell us about
the fonnation of a cloud, the journey of a cloud and the ad-
venture of a cloud.
     If you were to love a cloud, with this insight you would
know that the cloud is impennanent. If you love a human
being you can also know that he or she is impennanent. If
you were to become attached to a cloud you would have to
be very careful. You know that, according to the law of im-
pennanence, very soon the cloud will become something else.
It might become rain.
     You might say to the cloud, "Darling cloud, I know you
are there and I also know that one day you will die. I also
must die. You will become something else, someone else. I
know you will continue your journey, but I shall have to look
deeply in order to recognize your continuation so that I will
not suffer so much."
     If you forget about impennanence and are attached to
the cloud, when the time comes for the cloud to be trans-
                               61


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
formed into rain, you will cry, "Oh dear, my cloud is no
longer there. How can I survive without her?"
     But if you practice looking deeply, you can see the cloud
in new forms like the mist or the rain. The rain is smiling,
singing, falling down, full oflife, full of beauty. Yet because of
your forgetfulness you are not capable of recognizing the
presence of the cloud in this new manifestation. You are
caught in grief You keep crying and crying and meanwhile the
rain is calling you, "Darling, darling, I am here, recognize me!"
But you ignore the rain while all the time the rain is the con-
tinuation of the cloud. In fact the rain is the cloud herself
     When you look at the cloud, you might like to be like a
cloud floating freely in the sky. How wonderful it would be
to be a cloud floating in the sky! You would have such a feel-
ing of freedom. When you look at the rain falling, singing
and making music, you might also long to be the rain. The
rain is nourishing all the vegetation and the lives of innumer-
able beings. How wonderful it is to be the rain.
     Do you think the rain and the cloud are the same or dif-
ferent? The snow on the top of a mountain is so white, so
immaculate, so beautiful. It is so enchanting that you might
like to see yourself as being like the snow. Sometimes when
you look at the water flowing in the creek, you see the stream
so crystal pure and beautiful that you may like to be like the
water, always flowing. Cloud, rain, snow and water. Are they


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
four different things? Or are they really the same reality,
sharing the same ground of being?
                            No Fear
In chemistry we would call the ground of being of water H 2 0:
two hydrogen atoms and an oxygen atom. From this ground
of being, a molecule, many things can manifest: clouds, rain,
snow, water. It is wonderful to be a cloud, but it is also won-
derful to be the rain. It is also wonderful to be the snow or
water. If the cloud remembers this, then when the cloud is
about to transform and continue in the form of rain, it will
not be so frightened. It will remember that to be a cloud is
wonderful, but to be the rain falling down is also wonderful.
     When the cloud is not caught in the idea of birth and
death, or being and non-being, there is no fear. By learning
from the cloud, we can nurture our non-fear. Non-fear is the
ground of true well-being. As long as fear is in us, happiness
cannot be perfect.
     When you practice looking deeply, you see your true na-
ture of no birth, no death; no being, no non-being; no coming,
no going; no same, no different. When you see this, you are
free from fear. You are free from craving and free from jeal-
ousy. No fear is the ultimate joy. When you have the insight


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
of no fear, you are free. And like the great beings, you ride
serenely on the waves of birth and death.
                 Manifesting and Hiding
The true nature of all things is not to be born, not to die, not
to arrive and not to depart. My true nature is the nature of no
coming and no going. When there are sufficient conditions, I
manifest, and when the conditions are no longer sufficient, I
hide. I do not go anywhere. Where would I go? I simply hide.
    If your dear one has just died, you may have a difficult
time overcoming your loss. You may be crying all the time.
But look deeply. There is a divine medicine to help you over-
come your pain, to see that your dear one is not born and
does not die, does not come and does not go.
    It is only because of our misunderstanding that we think
the person we love no longer exists after they "pass away."
This is because we are attached to one of the forms, one of
the many manifestations of that person. When that form is
gone, we suffer and feel sad.
    The person we love is still there. He is around us, within
us and smiling at us. In our delusion we cannot recognize him,
and we say: "He no longer is." We ask over and over, "Where
are you? Why did you leave me all alone?" Our pain is great
because of our misunderstanding. But the cloud is not lost.


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
Our beloved is not lost. The cloud is manifesting in a differ-
ent form. Our beloved is manifesting in a different form. If we
can understand this, then we will suffer much less.
                     Taking New Forms
When we lose someone we love, we should remember that
the person has not become nothing. "Something" cannot be-
come "nothing," and "nothing" cannot become "something."
Science can help us understand this, because matter cannot
be destroyed-it can become energy. And energy can be-
come matter, but it cannot be destroyed. In the same way, our
beloved was not destroyed; she has just taken on another
form. That form may be a cloud, a child or the breeze. We
can see our loved one in everything. And smiling, we can say,
"Dear one, I know you are there very close to me. I know that
your nature is the nature of no birth and no death. I know
that I have not lost you; you are always with me."
     If you look deeply at every moment of your daily life,
you will see that person. Practicing like this, you will be able
to overcome your grie£ The same is true with your mother
or your father. Their true nature is the nature of not born,
not dying, not arriving and not departing. In reality, you have
not lost anyone who has died.


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
         The Story oj the River and the Clouds
There is a story I like to tell about a river that followed the
clouds. There is a little stream that comes from a mountain
spring. It is very small and young and wants to reach the sea
as quickly as possible. It does not know how to dwell peace-
fully in the present moment. It is in a hurry because it is so
young. It has not realized the practice of HI am home, I have
arrived," so it flows down the mountain, reaches the plains
and becomes a river.
     As a river it has to go more slowly. This is irritating be-
cause it is afraid that it will never get to the sea. But since it is
forced to go more slowly, its waters become more still. Its
surface begins to reflect the clouds in the sky-pink clouds,
silver clouds, white clouds. There are so many wonderful
shapes. All day it follows the clouds. It becomes attached to
the beautiful clouds. So the river suffers because the clouds
are impermanent. They are always moving with the wind,
leaving the river to go off somewhere else. How the river suf-
fers! The river tries over and over to hold on to the clouds. It
is sad that the clouds will not stay with it and stand still.
     One day a stormy wind blew all the clouds away. The
vault of the sky was very clear blue and empty. How the river
despaired. It no longer had a cloud to follow. There was not
a cloud in the sky. The vast expanse of blue brought despair
                                  66


              TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
into the river's heart. "What is there to live for without the
clouds? What is there to live for without my beloved one?"
The river wanted to die, but how could a river kill itself? All
night long it wept.
     That night the river had a chance to listen to itself crying.
The sound of its weeping was the sound of its own waves lap-
ping on the shore. When it was able to come back to itself and
hear its own crying, it had a very wonderful insight. It realized
that its own nature was also the nature of the cloud. It was the
cloud. The cloud lay in the depths of its own being. Just like
the river, the cloud was grounded in water. The cloud was
made of water. So why, the river thought, do I need to run 1ter the
cloud? I only need to run 1ter the cloud if I am not the cloud.
     That night of utter loneliness and depression helped the
river to wake up and see that it was also the cloud. That
morning the blue emptiness of the sky, which had made the
river feel so lonely, was now something new and very won-
derful, clear and bright. The blueness of the sky was reflect-
ing the newfound freedom and innocence of the river. It
knew that the vault of the sky was the home of all the clouds
and no cloud could exist outside the vault of the sky. The
river understood that the nature of the cloud was not to ar-
rive and not to depart, so why should the river cry? Why
should it weep as if it had been torn from the cloud?
     The river had another insight that morning. It saw the
no-birth, no-death nature of the sky. This made the river


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
very peaceful and quiet. It began to welcome and reflect the
sky. Before that, it had not reflected the sky, it had only re-
flected the clouds. Now the sky was always there for the
river, day and night. Before, the river had not wanted to be in
touch with the true nature of things. It had only wanted to
be in touch with change, with birth and death. Now that it
had been in touch with the vault of the sky, it became very
peaceful and quiet. It had never felt so much peace.
     That afternoon when the clouds came back, the river was
no longer attached to any particular one of them. There was
no cloud it felt to be its own special cloud. It smiled at every
cloud as it passed. It welcomed and loved every cloud.
     Now the river felt the special joy of equanimity. It was
not partial to any particular cloud or in the grip of any par-
ticular cloud. It loved them all. It could enjoy being with and
reflecting every cloud that came through the sky. When a
cloud left it, the river said, "Good-bye. See you again soon,"
and it felt very light at heart. It knew that the cloud would
return to it after it became rain or snow.
     The river was free. It did not feel it even needed to run
to the sea anymore. That night a full moon rose and shone
into the depths of the river. The moon, the river and the
water practiced meditation together. The river enjoyed the
present moment in freedom. It was liberated from all sorrow.
     When we chase an object, trying to grab it, we suffer.
And when there is no object to run after, we also suffer. If
                                 68


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
you have been a river, if you have run after the clouds, suf-
fered, cried and been lonely, please hold the hand of a friend.
Looking deeply together, you can see that what you were
looking for has always been there. In fact it is you, yourself.
     You are what you want to become. Why search any-
more? You are a wonderful manifestation. The whole uni-
verse has come together to make your existence possible.
There is nothing that is not you. The kingdom of God, the
Pure Land, nirvana, happiness and liberation are all you.
                      The Same Body?
Suppose we practice cloning, and every cell in our body is
made into a new body. Does that mean that one soul can be-
come many souls? One person can become many people? Are
all those new people the same or different?
     Science has already advanced to the point where it can
perform cloning of animals. It is possible that this can be
done with human beings also. If, for example, we take three
cells from my body and we make three clones, will those
three clones plus myself make four people or one person?
When the clones are made, I might already be quite old and
the three clones would be very young. So am I and those
three people the same or different?
     If we practice meditation, we can look deeply with the


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
power of mindfulness, the energy of concentration and the
energy of insight. Then we are able to see things much more
deeply and clearly. The Buddha is someone who practiced
like that, and he shared the insight he had with us. We also
practice like the Buddha, and with a little effort we will have
insight like the Buddha had.
     First we should look deeply into the idea of the same
and different. When we ask the Buddha: "Are this body and
the other three clones the same or different?" the Buddha
will say, "They are not the same and they are not different."
     Impermanence means something is always changing. We
think that our body is permanent. In fact, birth and death are
taking place in our body all the time. At every moment many
cells are dying and many cells are being born.
     We have the illusion that our bodies are always our bod-
ies. You were born a baby. Your mother took a picture of
you when you were small, and now you have grown into a
man or woman. Do you think you are the same person as
that tiny baby, or are you different?
     We think that at five years old it is our bodies and at
fifty years old it is our bodies. But it is wrong to think that it
is the same body. If you have a family photo album, please
look at it and you will see what you looked like when you
were six years old and what you look like now at sixty. You
will see that those two people look very different. They are
different. But in another sense they are not different. If there
                                70


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
were not the six-year-old, there would not be the sixty-year-
old. They are not the same and they are not different. Imper-
manence is the explanation for this puzzle.
     After one in- and out-breath we have already become a
different person. From the moment we began reading this
book until this moment, there have been many changes within
our bodies and within our consciousnesses. Many cells have
died; many new cells have been born. The same is true of our
consciousness. Thoughts come and go, feelings are born and
die. Manifestation and the cessation of manifestation are con-
stantly taking place. We do not remain the same in two con-
secutive moments. The same is true of the river, the flame, the
cloud or the sunflower.
                         Conditions
Looking deeply into a box of matches, you can see the flame.
The flame has not manifested, but as a meditator you can see
the flame. All the conditions are sufficient for the flame to
manifest. There is wood, sulfur, a rough surface and my
hands. So when I strike the match and the flame appears I
would not call that the birth of a flame. I would call it a man-
ifestation of a flame.
     The Buddha said that when conditions are sufficient you
manifest yourself. When conditions are no longer sufficient,
                               71


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
you stop the manifestation in order to manifest mother
forms, with other conditions.
                Manifesting from Something
What do you think birth is? Most of us think birth means
that something begins to exist where something didn't exist
before. In our mind we have the concept that birth means
that from nothing you suddenly become something; from no
one you suddenly become someone. Most of us would define
birth like that. Looking deeply, we see that this definition is
not sound. From nothing, you cannot become something.
From no one, you can never become someone.
    Before your so-called birthday, you were already there, in
your mother. So that moment of childbirth is only a moment
of continuation. Look and see if you can find the moment
that you became something from nothing. Was it at the mo-
ment of conception in the womb of your mother? That is
not correct either, because before that there had been some-
thing else, maybe half in your father, half in your mother;
maybe one third in your father, one third in your mother,
one third in the cosmos. There were many" somethings" that
were already there. If something existed already, it does not
need to be born. The time when a mother is in labor and
                              72


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
then gives birth is not really the moment of birth; it is just a
moment of the coming into the world from the womb.
     In Zen we like to ask the question, "What did your face
look like before your grandmother was born?" Ask yourself
this question and you will begin to see your own continua-
tion. You will see that you have always been there. The mo-
ment of your conception is a moment of continuation, of
manifesting in another form. If you keep looking you will see
that instead of birth and death, there is only continuing
transformation.
           Where Does the Flame Come From?
I can say to the flame, "Dear flame, please manifest yourself."
As I strike the match, the flame complies. But I would also
like to ask her, "Where have you come from?"
     The flame would say this: "Dear Thay, I come from
nowhere and I go nowhere. When conditions are sufficient, I
manifest." That is the truth of the nature of no coming, no
gomg.
     Let us practice looking deeply into the nature of the
flame of a candle. Is it the same flame as the flame of the
match that lit it? Or is it a different flame? If we maintain
this flame for one hour, the flame will bum lower on the
                                73


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
candle. It may appear to be the same flame, but that is only
our perception. In fact there are multitudes of flames suc-
ceeding one another in every instant. They give the impres-
sion that it is always the same flame, but it is not. The fuel is
different, the oxygen is different. The room has changed, and
so the conditions are different. Therefore the flame is not ex-
actly the same.
     It does not take much time for the flame to change be-
cause in one second the flame is nourished by the wax and
oxygen in the first part of the candle. The next moment, the
oxygen and the wax are being burned away and new fuel, new
wax and oxygen, are now burning. It is not the same fuel, so
it is not the same flame. When the candle becomes shorter,
you see that it has consumed this much wax and that much
oxygen, so you know that the flame is changing all the time.
Just like us, the flame does not remain the same in two con-
secutive moments.
     Looking at just one flame you see already the nature of
being neither the same nor different. Underneath our impres-
sion of being the same, there is the nature of impermanence.
Nothing can remain the same in two consecutive moments.
This applies to a human being, a cloud, to everything. If you
say that the flame burning on the candle ten minutes ago is the
same as the flame you see now, this is not correct. If you say
there are one thousand different flames succeeding each other,
this is not correct either. The true nature of the flame is the
                               74


              TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
nature of neither the same nor different. If we can move
through the illusion of same and different, we can change a lot
of suffering into joy.
                            Impressions
In the sutras there is an excellent example. In the darkness
one person holds a torch and draws a circle of fire. Another
person, standing a little bit away, has the impression that
there is a fire circle. But there is no circle, there are only dots
of fire that succeed each other and give the impression of a
fire circle. This is like the illusion of fixed identity and the il-
lusion of permanence. The fire circle is an idea. It cannot be
applied to reality, and it cannot describe the true reality. If
you analyze the fire circle you will see that there are millions
of instances moving in quick succession that give the impres-
sion that there is a fire circle.
     When we film someone dancing, we are taking many pic-
tures of that person dancing. We take so many pictures and
then when we project these frames one after another, we have
the impression that there is fluid movement. But in fact these
are only innumerable still pictures, one succeeding another.
     When we look at someone, we have the impression that
there is a permanent self or entity. We think that this morn-
ing I recognized this identity and this evening, when I look, I
                                  75


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
will recognize that same entity. If! travel somewhere else and
come back ten years later I will also recognize the same en-
tity. That is an illusion.
     There's a very funny story in the sutras. A woman left a
saucepan of milk with her neighbor, saying: "Please keep it
for me; I shall come back in two or three days." There was
no refrigeration, so the milk curdled and became a kind of
cheese. When the woman came back she said: "Where's my
milk? I left milk behind, not cheese, so this is not my milk
here." The Buddha said that this person had not understood
impermanence. Milk will become yogurt or cheese if you
leave it for a few days. The person wanted only the milk of
five days ago and refused to take the cheese. Do you think
that milk and cheese are the same or different? They are nei-
ther the same nor different, but it takes several days for the
milk to become cheese. With the insight of impermanence
we can see the truth about the universe and all phenomena,
the true nature of being neither the same nor different.
     We presume that things remain the same forever, but in
reality nothing remains the same in two consecutive mo-
ments. That is why the notion of a fixed identity is also an il-
lusion, an idea that cannot be applied to reality. There is a
stream of manifestation, yes, and you can assign to it a name,
like the Mississippi River. Although the name does not
change, the reality does. You have the impression that the
river is always there for you, but the water in it is not the


             TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
same even after just one moment. Philosophers have said that
you can never bathe twice in the same river. This is the na-
ture of impermanence confirmed, not only by the Buddha,
but by Confucius and Herachtus and many other wise people
who knew how to look deeply into the nature of reality.
              St. Francis and the Almond Tree
One day, while doing walking meditation during winter in his
garden, St. Francis of Assisi saw a bare almond tree. He ap-
proached the almond tree and, as he practiced breathing in
and out, asked the almond tree to tell him about God. Sud-
denly the almond tree was covered with blossoms. I believe
the story to be true because such a contemplative could see
into the depth of reality. He did not need to have the warmth
of spring in order to realize that the almond blossoms were al-
ready there.
     I invite you to look at a box of matches with the eyes of
St. Francis, the eyes of the Buddha. You do have those eyes.
Can you see the flame already in the box of matches? It has
not manifested but it is there somewhere. Looking deeply,
you can already see the flame. All conditions are there for
the flame to manifest, except one-a movement of your fin-
gers. You can furnish that last condition and see the flame
manifesting.
                                77


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     When you strike a match, please do it very mindfully.
Observe all the conditions. Ask the flame, "Dear little flame,
where have you come from?" When you extinguish it, ask,
"Where have you gone to?" We think the flame, which was
born a moment ago, is now going to die. Is there any place
separate from us in space that the flame has gone to? I don't
think so.
     The Buddha said that there is no coming; there is no
going. These are questions philosophers have asked many
times and have used so much paper, ink and saliva to try to
answer. Looking deeply with your Buddha eyes, you can find
the answer.
                              Suchness
Reality, as it is, is called suchness. Suchness means, "it is like
that." You cannot describe it in terms of notions, especially
notions of birth and death, being and non-being, coming and
going. No word, no idea, no notion can describe reality: the
reality of a table, the reality of a flower, the reality of a house,
the reality of a living being.
     Sometimes you are angry with your father and you say,
"I don't want anything to do with him!" What a declaration!
You don't know that you and your father belong to the same
reality; you are his continuation, you are he. Look into


             TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
whether you are the same as your father or different from
him. Our true nature is the nature of not the same, not dif-
ferent. You and your father are not the same; and you are not
different.
     When you help the flame to manifest by striking the
match, look deeply and you can see that it comes from no-
where, and it goes nowhere. Use the flame on the match to
light a candle. Is the flame of the candle the same as the flame
of the match or different? If you have a second candle and
light it too, you can ask if the three flames are the same or dif-
ferent.
     Looking into a flame of one candle, we can see in this
very flame that the idea of "neither the same nor different"
applies not only to the flames of the two different candles
but also to the one flame that lit them both. This flame is not
the same and is not different because each moment of that
flame is unique. The moment that comes next is a moment
when the flame manifests itself in a different way.
     The manifestation of something or someone does not
rely on one condition alone; it relies on many conditions. So,
the idea that one cause can bring about the effect is not cor-
rect. One cause is never enough to help something manifest.
     While we were contemplating the flame we did not look
deeply enough to see all the conditions. We know that the
flame is nourished by the matchstick, by the wood and by
fueL It is true that nothing can survive without fuel, but the
                                 79


                        NO DEATH, NO FEAR
fuel is only one element, one condition. The flame can mani-
fest itself only when all the elements are there. If there is no
oxygen in the air, the flame cannot appear for very long. The
flame relies on the wood, on the wick, on oxygen. The flame
is already there in the matchbox. It does not need to be born,
it only needs to manifest when the conditions are right.
     We may only be a boy or a girl of twelve years old and
do not now have children of our own. But in our person, all
the causes and conditions for the manifestation of children
and grandchildren are there. It's just a matter of time and
conditions.
     A SHEET OF PAPER
     No coming, no going,
     No after, no bifore,
     I hold you close,
     I release you to be free;
     I am inyou
     And you are in me.
     No coming, no going is the true nature of reality. You
have come from nowhere; you will go nowhere. The rose, the
cloud, the mountains, the stars, the planet Earth-everything
is like that. Their nature is the nature of no coming, no
going. To die does not mean that from something you be-
                               80


             TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
come nothing. To be born does not mean that from no one
you suddenly become someone. There is only manifestation
based on sufficient conditions, and the cessation of manifes-
tation, based on the lack of proper conditions.
     The sheet of paper on which these words are written has
a history. This page in the book that you are holding in your
hands took its form in a single moment. That does not mean
that it was the moment of its birth. It was already there as the
light of the sun, as the trunk of a tree, as the cloud and the
earth. The moment when it came from the factory was just
its moment of manifestation.
     So we should ask, "Dear little sheet of paper, were you
there before you were born?" The sheet of paper will answer,
"Yes, in the form of a tree, in the form of the sunshine, in
the form of a cloud and the rain, in the form of minerals and
the earth. The moment of becoming a sheet of paper was a
moment of continuation. I have not come from nothing. I
have come from the cosmos. I have been a tree, I have been a
cloud, I have been sunshine, soil and so on."
     Looking deeply into the sheet of paper, you can still see
the trees, the cloud, and the sunshine. You do not have to go
to the past. That is the advantage of being a meditator; you do
not have to travel. You just sit there and look deeply, and you
can see and recognize everything. The sheet of paper contains
all the information about the cosmos, including information
concerning the cloud, the sunshine, the trees, the earth. If you
                                81


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
return one of these elements to its origin, the sheet of paper
will no longer be there. If you returned the sunshine to the
sun, there would be no forest, and no paper. That is why the
sunshine is in the paper. When you touch the sheet of paper,
you touch the sunshine, you touch the cloud, you touch the
rain, you touch the earth, you touch the whole cosmos. One
manifestation contains all.
     If you run your fingers over the paper, you can feel the
cloud in it. Without the rain, which comes from the cloud,
there would be no paper. When you are running your fingers
over the piece of paper, you are running your fingers over the
trees in the forest. With our fingers we can touch the sun and
all the minerals of the earth in the paper. All these conditions
lie in the paper. When we can be in touch with the paper
with our awakened understanding, we are in touch with the
whole of existence.
     When we practice looking deeply into this sheet of pa-
per, we can see the forest. Without the forest there would be
no tree, without the trees we cannot make paper. So this
sheet of paper has not come from nothing; it has come from
something like the trees. But the trees are not enough to
make the sheet of paper. The sunshine nourishes the trees;
the clouds water the trees; the soil, the minerals and a multi-
tude of other phenomena help the sheet of paper to manifest.
And then there has to be a logger who cuts the tree, and the
deli worker that made the sandwich for the logger's lunch,


               TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
 and the people who formed the company that pays the log-
 gers. These things do not exist outside the sheet of paper.
 They are one with the paper.
      You may think, How can I identify this sheet oj paper with the
forest? The forest is outside the paper. If you remove the forest or the
 cloud from the sheet of paper, the sheet of paper will fly
 apart. If there were no clouds, and no rain from the clouds,
 how could trees grow? How could we make paper paste in
 order to produce a sheet of paper?
      The sheet of paper has no birthday, and you have no
 birthday. You were there before you were born. The next
 time you celebrate your birthday, you might like to change
 the song to "Happy Continuation Day." If it is true that the
 birthday is a continuation day, then what you call the day of
 death is also a continuation day. If your practice is strong,
 at the moment of dying you will sing a song of happy con-
 tinuation.
                         Try to Make Nothing
 You can try to make a sheet of paper into nothing. Is it pos-
 sible? Strike a match and bum it to see whether it becomes
 nothing, or whether it becomes something else. This is not
 just a theory-it is something we can prove. Breathe in and
 out as you strike the match. Witness the transformation of a


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
sheet of paper. As you light the match, be aware that the
flame does not need to be born. With the right conditions, it
only has to manifest for us to see it. As you bum the paper,
see the smoke. The heat is enough to bum your fingers.
Where is the paper now?
     When you bum a sheet of paper, it is no longer in the
form of paper. If you follow it with your mindfulness, you
will see that the sheet of paper continues in other forms. One
of its forms will be smoke. The smoke from the piece of
paper rises and will join one or two of the clouds already ex-
isting in the sky. It is now participating in a cloud, and we
can wave good-bye to it. Good-bye piece of paper, see you
again very soon. Tomorrow, next month, there will be rain
and a drop of water can fall on your forehead. That drop of
water is your sheet of paper.
     Another form the paper takes on is ash. You can give
the ash back to the soil. When it is returned to the soil, the
earth becomes a continuation of the sheet of paper. Maybe
next year you will see the continuation of the paper in a tiny
flower or a blade of grass. That is the afterlife of a sheet of
paper.
     During the process of being burned, the piece of paper
also became heat. That heat penetrates into our bodies, even
if you are not very close to the flame. Now you carry the
sheet of paper in you. The heat penetrates deeply into the
cosmos. If you are a scientist and have very sophisticated in-


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
struments, you can measure the effects of that heat even in
distant planets and stars. They then become a manifestation,
a continuation of the little sheet of paper. We cannot know
how far the sheet of paper will go.
     Scientists say that if you clap your hands it may have an
impact on a distant star. What is happening with us can af-
fect a galaxy far away. And the galaxy far away can affect us.
Everything is under the influence of everything else.
                       Nothing Is Lost
To meditate means to be invited on a journey of looking
deeply in order to touch our true nature and to recognize
that nothing is lost. Because of this we can overcome fear.
Non-fear is the greatest gift of meditation. With it we can
overcome grief and our sorrow.
     Only nothing can come from nothing. Something cannot
come from nothing and nothing cannot come from some-
thing. If something is already there, it does not need to be
born. The moment of birth is only a moment of continuation.
You can be perceived as a baby the day of your so-called birth
and everyone thinks of you as now existing. But you already
existed before that day.
     To die in our notion of death means that from some-
thing you suddenly become nothing. From someone you


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
suddenly become no one-that is a horrible idea and makes
no sense. If something has not been born, will that some-
thing have to die sometime? Can you reduce the sheet of
paper into non-being, nothing?
     I can testify that a sheet of paper has never been born,
because to be born means from nothing you suddenly be-
come something, from no one you suddenly become some-
one. That idea is not compatible with reality. Your true
nature is the nature of no birth; the nature of the sheet of
paper is also the nature of no birth. You have never been
born; you have been there for a long, long time.
               You Have Always Been There
When you were a child you may have liked to play with a
kaleidoscope. Every movement of your fingers created a won-
derful pattern of colors. If you moved it a little bit, then what
you see would change. It was also beautiful, but it would be
different. You might say that the different patterns within the
kaleidoscope were being born or dying, but as a child you did
not mourn that kind of birth and death. Instead, you contin-
ued to delight in seeing different forms and colors.
    If we are able to touch our ground of no birth and no
death, we will have no fear. That is the base of our true hap-
piness. As long as fear is still in you, your happiness cannot be
                                  86


              TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
perfect. The bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara has offered us the
Heart Sutra. In that sutra we learn that reality is as it is, not
conditioned by birth, death, coming, going, being, non-being,
increasing, decreasing, being defiled or immaculate. Weare
full of all these notions, and we suffer because we are caught
in these notions. Our true liberation is the liberation from
notions.
     When you come to a practice center, you hope to allevi-
ate some of your suffering. You hope for some relief, but the
greatest relief of all can be obtained only by touching your
true nature, the nature of no birth and no death. That is the
deepest teaching the Buddha offered to us.
                         No Creation
Look at the sunflower growing in the garden. The sunflower
relies on so many elements in order to manifest itself. There
is a cloud inside of the flower because if there were no cloud
there would be no rain, and no sunflower could grow. There
is the sunshine in the sunflower. We know that without sun-
shine nothing can grow; there would be no sunflower. We
see the earth, we see the minerals, we see the farmer, we see
the gardener, and we see time, space, ideas, the willingness to
grow and many other elements. So, sunflowers depend on
many conditions in order to manifest, not just one.


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
     I like to use the word "manifestation" instead of "birth,"
and I also like to use it instead of "creation." In our minds,
"to create" also means from nothing something is brought
forth. The farmer who grows sunflowers does not create the
sunflowers. If you look deeply, you see that the farmer is
only one of the conditions that can bring sunflowers into
being. There are seeds of sunflowers stored in the bam, there
are fields outside where you can plant sunflowers, there are
clouds in the sky to make rain, there are fertilizers, there is
the sunshine to help the sunflower to grow. You, the farmer,
are not really the creator of the sunflower. You are just one
of the conditions. Without you the sunflowers cannot mani-
fest. But the same is true of the other conditions. All are
equally important to the manifestation of the sunflower.
     When you come to Plum Village in the month of July,
you will see many sunflowers on the surrounding hills. Hun-
dreds of thousands of sunflowers all tum toward the east,
smiling and bright. If you come in the month of Mayor
April, the hills are bare. But when the farmers walk through
their fields, they can already see the sunflowers. They know
that the sunflowers have been planted, that every condition is
sufficient. The farmers have sown the seeds; the soil has been
prepared. Only one condition is missing-the warmth that
will come in June and July.
     It is not because something manifests that you can de-
scribe it as being. It is not because it has not manifested or
                               88


            TRANSFORMING GRIEF AND FEAR
has ceased its manifestation that you can call it non-being.
"Being" and "non-being" cannot apply to reality. By looking
deeply, you realize that reality is not subject to birth and
death, to being and non-being.
    When Paul Tillich said, "God is the ground of being,"
that being should not be confounded with the being that is
opposed to non-being. You are invited to look deeply into
the notion of being in order to be free from it.
                              89




    Five
   NEW
BEGINNINGS




Where was Jesus before he was born? Over the years I have
asked many of my Christian friends this question. If we want
to look into this question deeply, we must explore the life and
the death of Jesus in terms of manifestation. Jesus Christ was
not no one before his birth. It was not in Bethlehem that Jesus
came into being. The event of the nativity was only an occa-
sion of manifestation; Jesus did exist before the moment of
so-called birth or nativity. So we should not really call it a
birth. It's not really the nativity. It's really only a manifesta-
tion. By looking with the insight of manifestation, we have an
opportunity to see deeply into the person of Jesus. We can
discover the truth of his immortality. We can discover the
truth of our own nature of no birth and no death.
     It is said by Christians that God sent his only son, Jesus,
to earth. Since God was there, and Jesus is a part of God, and
Jesus is the Son of God, Jesus was already there. The day of
Christ's birth, Christmas, is a manifestation day, not a nativ-
ity day. This day was only the time when the manifestation
took place.
     Jesus Christ is still manifesting himself in many thou-
                                93


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
sands of ways. He is manifesting himself all around you. We
need to be alert in order to recognize his manifestations. If
you are not mindful or attentive, you will miss him because
you will miss his manifestations. In the morning when you
practice walking meditation, you may recognize his manifes-
tation as a flower, as a drop of water, as a bird song or as a
child playing in the grass. We have to be very careful not to
miss these things.
     In the teaching and understanding of the Buddha, we all
share the nature of no birth and no death. Not only humans,
but also animals, plants and minerals share the nature of no
birth and no death. A leaf and a flower share the same ground
of no birth and no death. There is a manifestation of a flower
or a leaf or a cloud. During the winter we do not see any sun-
flowers or dragonflies, and we do not hear the cuckoo bird
sing. It seems that they do not exist in winter, but we know
that this idea is wrong. In the beginning of spring, all of these
beings will manifest themselves again. They have just been
somewhere else during the winter, in another manifestation,
waiting until conditions are favorable in order to manifest
themselves again. To qualify them as non-existing in winter is
a wrong perception.
                                94


                        NEW BEGINNINGS
          ((Passed Away" Does Not Mean ((Gone"
We must also ask the question, If Jesus was not born then
how could he die? Though he was crucified, did he cease to
exist? And did Jesus need to be resurrected?
     Is it possible that his crucifixion was not a death? Is it pos-
sible it was a hiding? His true nature is the nature of no birth
and no death. This is true not just of Jesus. In this sense a cloud
is the same, a sunflower is the same, and you and I are the same.
Weare not born and we do not die. And since Jesus Christ is
not affected by birth and death, we call him the Living Christ.
     It is real and deep wisdom to learn to look at things in
terms of manifestation. If someone who is very close to you
has passed away and you define him or her as non-existing,
you are mistaken. From nothing cannot be born something.
From no one cannot be born someone. From something you
cannot become nothing. From someone you cannot become
no one. That is the truth. If the person who is close to you
does not manifest in the form that you are used to seeing or
perceiving, that does not mean that he is non-existing. It does
not mean that he is no longer there. If you look deeply, you
can touch his or her presence in other forms of manifestation.
     One day I took the hand of a young father who had just
buried his little son. I invited him to walk with me to dis-
cover his son in other forms.
                                  95


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     His son had come to Plum Village when he was very
young and learned to enjoy vegetarian food. He gave me his
allowance and extra pocket money and asked me to buy a
plum tree and plant it for him. He wanted to participate in
the work of supporting hungry children in the world by
planting a fruit tree in Plum Village. He knew that a plum
tree gives a lot of fruit. He knew that we could sell the fruit
and send the money to hungry children in the third world.
He learned to do walking and sitting meditation, and he
practiced the dharma very well. When he was sick I went to
Bordeaux and visited him in the hospital. He said to me,
"Grandpa monk, I will do walking meditation for you." He
got down from his bed, although he was quite weak, and
walked beautifully for me. Shortly afrer my visit, he died.
The day of his cremation, I sprinkled the consecrated water
and chanted the Heart Sutra for him. A week later I took the
hand of his father during a walking meditation and showed
him many other manifestations of his little boy. Together we
visited the plum tree I planted for his son, and as we sat in
the afternoon light, we saw his little boy waving to us from
every bud and branch.
     Looking deeply into reality, you can discover many
things. You can surmount so much suffering and counter
many wrong perceptions. If we can abide peacefully in the
ultimate dimension, we will not drown in the ocean of suf-
fering, grief, fear and despair.


                      NEW BEGINNINGS
                 Re-Manifesting Ourselves
In the ultimate dimension, we have never been born and we
will never die. In the historical dimension, we live in forget-
fUlness and we are rarely truly alive. We live like dead people.
     In Albert Camus' novel The Stranger, the main character,
out of despair and rage, shoots and kills someone. He re-
ceives the death sentence for his crime. One day, while lying
on the bed in his prison cell, he looks up at the square-
shaped skylight over him. Suddenly he becomes aware of and
deeply in touch with the blue sky above. He has never seen
the sky in that way before. Camus called this a moment of
consciousness, which is a moment of awareness or of mind-
fUlness. For the condemned man, it was the first time in his
life that he really came into touch with the sky and realized
what a miracle it was.
     From that moment on, he wants to maintain that kind of
shining awareness. He believes this was the only kind of energy
that can keep him alive. He has only three days left before his
execution. He practices all alone in the prison to maintain that
awareness, to keep his mindfUlness alive. He vows to live every
minute of the three days left to him fully and in mindfUlness.
On his final day a priest comes to visit him to perform the last
rites. The condemned man does not want to waste his time
of awareness in receiving the sacrament. At first he resists, but
                               97


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
finally he opens the door for the priest to come in. When the
priest departs, the prisoner remarks to himself that the priest
lives like a dead person. He has seen no qualities of awareness
or mindfulness in the priest.
     If you live without awareness it is the same as being
dead. You cannot call that kind of existence being alive.
Many of us live like dead people because we live without
awareness. We carry our dead bodies with us and circulate
throughout the world. Weare pulled into the past or we are
pulled forward into the future or we are caught by our proj-
ects or our despair and anger. We are not truly alive; we are
not inhabited by awareness of the miracle of being alive. Al-
bert Camus never studied Buddhism, but in his novel he
speaks about a core practice of Buddhism, the" moment de con-
science," the moment of deep awareness or awakening.
     The practice of resurrection, or re-manifestation, is pos-
sible for all of us. Our practice is always to resurrect our
selves, going back to the mind and the body with the help of
mindful breathing and walking. This will produce our true
presence in the here and the now. Then we can become alive
again. We will be like dead people reborn. Weare free from
the past, we are free from the future, we are capable of estab-
lishing ourselves in the here and now. Weare fully present in
the here and now, and we are truly alive. That is the basic
practice of Buddhism. Whether you eat or drink or breathe
or walk or sit, you can practice resurrection. Always allow


                          NEW BEGINNINGS
yourself to be established in the here and now-fully pres-
ent, fully alive. That is the real practice of resurrection.
            The Only Moment We Can Be Alive
     I have arrived, I am home
     In the here, In the now
     I am solid, I am free
     In the ultimate, I dwell
     We cannot enjoy life if we spend a lot of time worrying
about what happened yesterday and what will happen tomor-
row. We worry about tomorrow because we are afraid. If we
are afraid all the time, we cannot appreciate that we are alive
and can be happy now.
     In our daily life, we tend to believe that happiness is only
possible in the future. Weare always looking for better
things, the right conditions to make us happy. We run away
from what is happening right in front of us. We try to find
things that make us feel more solid, more safe and secure.
But we are afraid all the time of what the future will bring.
We are afraid we'll lose our jobs, our possessions, the people
around us whom we love. So we wait for the magical mo-
ment-sometime in the future-when everything will be as
we like, as we want it to be.
                                 99


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     But life is available only in the present moment. The
Buddha said, "It is possible to live happily in the present mo-
ment. It is the only moment we have."
     When you come back to the here and the now, you will
recognize the many conditions of happiness that already
exist. The practice of mindfulness is the practice of coming
back to the here and the now to be in touch deeply with our-
selves, with life. We have to train ourselves in order to do
this. Even if we are very intelligent and we understand it
right away, we still have to train ourselves to live this way.
We have to train ourselves to recognize that the conditions
for happiness are already here.
                           True Home
Our true home is in the here and the now. The past is al-
ready gone and the future is not yet here. "I have arrived, I
am home, in the here, in the now." This is our practice.
     You can recite this gatha, or poem, during walking medi-
tation or sitting meditation. You can practice this poem
when you drive to your office. You may not have arrived at
your office, but even while driving you have already arrived
at your true home, the present moment. And when you arrive
at your office, this is also your true home. When you are in
your office, you are also in the here and the now.
                                100


                       NEW BEGINNINGS
     Just practicing the first line of the poem "I have arrived, I
am home" can make you very happy. Whether you are sit-
ting, whether you are walking, whether you are watering the
vegetables in the garden, or whether you are feeding your
child, it is always possible to practice "I have arrived, I am
home." I am not running anymore; I have run all my life;
now I am determined to stop and to really live my life.
                 What Are You Waiting For?
The French have a song called: ((~'est-ce qu'on Attend Pour Etre
Heureux?" (What are you waiting for to be happy?). When I
practice breathing in and I say, "I have arrived," that is an
achievement. Now I am fUlly present, one hundred percent
alive. The present moment has become my true home.
     When I breathe out I say, "I am home." If you do not
feel you are home, you will continue to run. And you will
continue to be afraid. But if you feel you are already home,
then you do not need to run anymore. This is the secret of
the practice. When we live in the present moment, it is possi-
ble to live in true happiness.
                                 101


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
                      Appreciating Earth
For many years I have told this story. Suppose two astro-
nauts go to the moon. When they arrive, they have an acci-
dent and find out that they have only enough oxygen for two
days. There is no hope of someone coming from Earth in
time to rescue them. They have only two days to live. If you
asked them at that moment, "What is your deepest wish?"
they would answer, "To be back home walking on the beau-
tiful planet Earth." That would be enough for them; they
would not want anything else. They would not want to be
the head of a large corporation, a big celebrity or president of
the United States. They would not want anything except to
be back on Earth-to be walking on Earth, enjoying every
step, listening to the sounds of nature and holding the hand
of their beloved while contemplating the moon.
     We should live every day like people who have just been
rescued from the moon. We are on Earth now, and we need
to enjoy walking on this precious, beautiful planet. The Zen
master Lin Chi said, "The miracle is not to walk on water
but to walk on the Earth." I cherish that teaching. I enjoy
just walking, even in busy places like airports and railway sta-
tions. In walking like that, with each step caressing our
Mother Earth, we can inspire other people to do the same.
We can enjoy every minute of our lives.
                              !OZ


    Six
   THE
ADDRESS OF
 HAPPINESS




If you want to know where God,       the Buddhas and all the
great beings live, I can tell you. Here is their address: in
the here and now. It has everything you need, including the
zip code.
     If you can breathe in and out and walk in the spirit of "I
have arrived, I am home, in the here, in the now," then you
will notice that you are becoming more solid and more free
immediately. You have established yourself in the present
moment, at your true address. Nothing can push you to run
anymore, or make you so afraid. You are free from worrying
about the past. You are not stuck, thinking about what has
not happened yet and what you cannot control. You are free
from guilt concerning the past and you are free from your
worries about the future.
     Only a free person can be a happy person. The amount
of happiness that you have depends on the amount of free-
dom that you have in your heart. Freedom here is not politi-
cal freedom. Freedom here is freedom from regret, freedom
from fear, from anxiety and sorrow. "I have arrived, I am
home, in the here, in the now."
                              10 5


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     "I am solid, I am free." This is what you feel, what you
become, when you arrive in the here and now. You're not
just telling yourself this-you will see it; you will feel it. And
when you do, you will be at peace. You will experience nir-
vana, or the kingdom of God, or whatever you may like to
call it. Even if you are not caught by a lot of worries, if you
are not solid and free, how can you be happy? To cultivate
solidity and freedom in the present moment is the greatest
gift we can give ourselves.
                   Dwelling in the Ultimate
"In the ultimate I dwell." The ultimate is the foundation of
our being, the ground of being. The ultimate, or God, or the
divine, is not separate from us. Weare in it all the time. It is
not somewhere up there beyond the sky. But we have to live
in our true home in order to dwell in the ultimate, in order
to live in the ultimate.
     It is like the wave and water. If we look into a wave, we see
that a wave can have a beginning and an end. A wave can be
high or low. A wave can be like other waves, or it can be dif-
ferent. But the wave is always made of water. Water is the
foundation of the wave. A wave is a wave, but it is also water.
The wave may have a beginning and an end, it may be big or
                                106


                THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
small, but with water there is no beginning, no end, no up, no
down, no this, no that. When the wave realizes and under-
stands this, it is free from the fear of beginning and end, up
and down, big and small, this and that.
     In the historical dimension, we have time and space, and
pairs of opposites: right and wrong, young and old, coming
and going, pure and impure. We look forward to beginning
and we are afraid of ending. But the ultimate dimension does
not have any of these things. There is no beginning or end,
no before or after. The ultimate is the ground that makes the
historical dimension possible. It is the original, continuing
source of being. It is nirvana. It is the kingdom of God.
     Our foundation is nirvana, the ultimate reality. You can
call it God or the kingdom of God. This is the water in
which we live. You are a wave, but at the same time you are
also water. You have a historical dimension and you also
have an ultimate dimension. If we understand that our true
nature is of no birth, no death, no coming, no going, then
our fear will depart and our pain and suffering will vanish.
     A wave does not have to die in order to become water.
She is water right here and now. We also do not have to die
in order to enter the kingdom of God. The kingdom of God
is our very foundation here and now. Our deepest practice is
to see and touch the ultimate dimension in ourselves every
day, the reality of no birth and no death. Only this practice
                               107


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
can remove our fear and suffering entirely. Rather than say-
ing, "In the ultimate I dwell," you may like to say, "In the
kingdom of God I dwell" or "In the Buddha land I dwell."
                      Releasing Sorrow
Suppose someone was able to transport you by jet to the king-
dom of God or the Pure Land of the Buddha. When you ar-
rived, how would you walk? In such a beautiful place, would
you walk under pressure, running and anxious like we do so
much of the time? Or would you enjoy every moment of being
in paradise? In the kingdom of God, or the Pure Land, people
are free and they enjoy every moment. So they do not walk
like we do.
     The Pure Land is not somewhere else; it is right here, in
the present. It is in every cell of our bodies. When we run
away from the present, we destroy the kingdom of God. But
if we know how to free ourselves from our habit energy of
running, then we will have peace and freedom and we will all
walk like a Buddha in paradise.
     What we carry with us determines in which dimension
we dwell. If you carry a lot of sorrow, fear and craving with
you, then wherever you go you will always touch the world
of suffering and hell. If you carry with you compassion, un-
                              ro8


               THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
derstanding and freedom, then wherever you go you will
touch the ultimate dimension, the kingdom of God.
     Wherever the practitioner goes, she knows she is touch-
ing the kingdom of God under her feet. There is not one day
when I do not walk in the kingdom of God. Because I prac-
tice freedom and compassion wherever I go, my feet touch
the kingdom of God, the ultimate dimension everywhere. If
we cultivate this kind of touching, then the important ele-
ments of solidity and freedom will be available to us twenty-
four hours every day.
     "I have arrived, I am home." The home of the wave is
water. It's right there. She does not have to travel thousands
of miles in order to arrive at her true home. It's so simple and
so powerful. I would like to invite you to memorize this little
poem and to practice and remember it many times a day. In
this way you will touch the ultimate dimension and always
remember your true home.
                 Habit Energy oj Running
We run during the daytime and we run during our sleep. We
do not know how to stop. Our practice is first of all to stop,
then to relax, to calm down and to concentrate. When we
can do this, then we are in the here and now. Then we be-
                                10 9


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
come solid. And when we are solid, we can look around. We
can look deeply into the present moment, we can look deeply
into our true nature, and we can discover the ultimate dimen-
sion. By looking deeply, we can see that though we are waves,
we are also water. But if we have not stopped, if we have not
learned to concentrate, then we cannot look deeply. We will
not free ourselves from fear because we will not be strong
enough or stable enough to see the reality of no coming and
no gomg.
     It is very hard to fight against the habits we have devel-
oped. Dr. Ambedkar was a member of Indian parliament
who came from the ranks of the Untouchables. He fought
for the rights of the Untouchables. He felt very strongly that
their hope for dignity and safety was in Buddhism. The Bud-
dha did not believe in the caste system. So, one day in the
city of Bombay, five hundred thousand Untouchables came
together and Dr. Ambedkar delivered the Three Refuges and
the Five Mindfulness Trainings of the Buddha. I went to
India to offer my support and assistance to this community
of Untouchables. We gave dharma talks and held days of
mindfulness.
     Imagine that you grew up as an Untouchable. Imagine
that everyone around you treated you badly and made you
afraid for your life. Imagine that you had to please all those
of higher rank in order to stay safe. How would you live?
Would you be relaxed and in the present moment? Or in
                               llO


               THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
constant worry about the future? The habit energy of anxiety
would be very strong.
     The friend who organized my trip came from the Un-
touchable community. He lived in New Delhi with his wife
and three children. He very much wanted to make my trip
pleasant and successful. One morning, we were sitting on a
bus together, traveling to another community. I was enjoying
the landscape of India from my window seat. When I turned
to look at my friend, I noticed that he was very tense. I said,
"My dear friend, I know that you very much want to make
my trip pleasant and happy, but you know, I am very happy
right now! Please, don't worry. Sit back and relax!" He said,
"Yes!" He relaxed a bit, so I turned to the window again and
I practiced breathing in and out. I enjoyed the palm trees in
the morning sun.
     I thought about the palm leaves on which the scriptures
of the Buddha have been written since ancient times. The
leaves are long and slender. A sharp point was used to in-
scribe the teaching of the Buddha on the leaves. They can be
preserved for a thousand years or more. I remembered that
some fifteen-hundred-year-old Buddhist texts had been dis-
covered in Nepal written on these leaves. Then my mind re-
turned to my friend. This took perhaps two minutes. I
turned to him and saw that he was becoming stiff and tense
again. It was difficult for him to relax for even a few minutes.
     As an Untouchable, he had struggled all of his life. Now,
                                III


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
even though he had a nice apartment in New Delhi and a good
job, the habit energy in him to struggle all the time was still
very strong. Throughout many generations, the Untouchables
have been struggling hard day and night to survive. That kind
of habit energy had been transmitted to him from many gen-
erations. It would be difficult for anyone to transform it
quickly. He needed some time and some training. With the
support of friends in the practice, in a few months or a few
years he could transform his energy of struggling and being
tense. It is possible for anyone to do. You can allow yourself
to relax and be free.
     If you want to transform your habit energy of running
and struggling, you have to recognize it every time it shows
its head. Breathing in and out and smiling, you say, "Oh, my
dear little habit energy, I know you are there!" At that mo-
ment you are free. You can remind yourself. You can teach
yoursel£ You cannot have a spiritual friend twenty-four
hours a day with you to remind you. I reminded my friend
one time, and it worked only for two minutes. He has to do
it himsel£ Everyone has to do it for themselves. You must
become your own spiritual friend and live in an environment
that helps you.
     The habit energy of running is strong in us. It may have
been transmitted to us by many generations. But you don't
need to pass that habit energy along. You should be able to
tell your children that you have walked in the kingdom of
                               lIZ


                 THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
  God. You may like to tell them, as I have told my friends,
  that there is not one day when I do not walk in the kingdom
  of God. If you can do this, your life will become an inspira-
  tion to many people. Perhaps you and your children will
. walk in the Pure Land all the time.
                     Releasing Our Baggage
  If we want to walk in the Pure Land all the time, it helps us
  to let go of the things that keep us from being in the present.
  It helps us to learn to let go of what makes us worry, to get
  to zero. When we think of zero, we think of it as nothing-
  ness. We see it as something negative. But zero can be very
  positive. If you have a debt to pay, that is negative. When
  you pay it back, your balance returns to zero. That is won-
  derful because then you are free.
       At the time of the Buddha, there was a monk whose
  name was Baddhiya. Before becoming a monk he had been
  governor of a province in the kingdom of Sakka where the
  Buddha was born. After his enlightenment the Buddha had
  come back to the kingdom of his birth and visited his family.
  When many young people saw the great happiness and lib-
  erty of the Buddha, they wanted to follow him. They wanted
  to be free.
       Among them was Baddhiya. During the first three months


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
of his monastic life he practiced so diligently that he could see
many things deeply. One night while practicing meditation in
the forest, he opened his mouth and said, "Oh my happiness!
Oh my happiness!"
     As governor, Baddhiya had slept in beautiful rooms. He
was guarded by many soldiers. He had expensive things to
eat and many servants. Now he sat at the foot of a tree, with
nothing but his begging bowl and monk's robe.
     A monk who was sitting close to Baddhiya heard his ex-
clamation. He thought Baddhiya regretted losing his former
positions of power. He thought Baddhiya must be regretting
losing his former life as a governor. In the early morning of
the next day the monk went to the Buddha and told him
what he had heard. The Buddha summoned Baddhiya and in
the presence of the entire community of monks the Buddha
said, "Brother Baddhiya, is it true that last night during sit-
ting meditation you opened your mouth and pronounced the
words, "Oh my happiness! Oh my happiness?" Baddhiya
replied, "Yes, that is true, Lord Buddha."
     The Buddha asked, "Why? Did you regret something?"
     Baddhiya answered, "During sitting meditation, I re-
membered the time when I was governor, attended by so
many servants and protected by bodyguards. I always lay
awake with fear. I was afraid that people would steal my
wealth from me. I was afraid of being assassinated. Now, sit-
ting at the foot of a tree and meditating, I felt so free. Now I


                THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
have nothing to lose. I enjoy deeply every moment, and I
have never been as happy as I am now. That is why I said,
'Oh my happiness! Oh my happiness!' Noble Teacher, if I
disturbed my brothers, I apologize." Only then did everyone
in the sangha understand that Baddhiya's words were an ex-
pression of his real happiness.
     Please take a pen and a sheet of paper. Go to the foot of
a tree or to your writing desk, and make a list of all the things
that can make you happy right now: the clouds in the sky, the
flowers in the garden, the children playing, the fact that you
have met the practice of mindfulness, your beloved ones sit-
ting in the next room, your two eyes in good condition. The
list is endless. You have enough already to be happy now.
You have enough to be free from coming and going, up and
down, birth and death. Nourish yourself every day with the
wonderful things that life has to offer you. Nourish yourself
in the present moment. Walk in the kingdom of God.
               What Are We Running Ajter?
If we are not fully present and not alive, either for our loved
ones or ourselves, where are we? Weare running, running,
running, even during our sleep. We run because our fear of
losing everything is chasing us. The practice of resurrection
can help us.


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     When you come back to mindfulness and awareness,
when the energy of mindfulness is present in you, the energy
of the Holy Spirit is present in you. The Holy Spirit makes
life possible: To be inhabited by the Holy Spirit is our prac-
tice. To live every moment in the presence of the Holy Spirit
is not something abstract. It can be done when you drink
your juice or your tea. Drink in such a way that the Holy
Spirit is present in you. When you eat some muesli, some
rice or some tofu, eat it in such a way that the Holy Spirit is
present in you. When you walk you should allow the Holy
Spirit to be walking in you.
     Please do not practice only for the sake of form. Every
walking meditation session is a new walking meditation ses-
sion. Walk in such a way that you will be nourished with
every step you make. Every meal should be a new meal where
you can nourish yourself with the energy of the Holy Spirit,
the energy of mindfulness. Every sitting session should be a
new sitting session.
     Sit in such a way that allows your new being to manifest.
Let us practice with friends. The sangha is intelligent enough,
is smart enough not to fall into the trap of doing the practice
as a routine and not as something creative. Many of us are in-
telligent and creative. We should use our intelligence and our
creativity in order to keep the practice alive and constantly re-
newed. It is perfectly possible to practice this kind of Bud-
dhist meditation as a Christian, as a Muslim, as a Hindu or as
                                Il6


                THE ADDRESS OF HAPPINESS
a Jew. It doesn't matter what religion you practice, or even if
you practice no religion at all.
     To practice does not mean to imitate the form. To prac-
tice means to use our intelligence and our skills to make
nourishment and transformation possible in our self, en-
gendering nourishment and transformation in the people
around us.
                      New Beginnings
When you eat your bread or your croissant in the morning,
eat in such a way that the bread becomes life. Celebrate the
Eucharist every morning while breaking the bread or biting
into your croissant. Feel alive; feel that you are in touch with
the whole cosmos. If the piece of bread is the body of Jesus,
it is also the body of the cosmos. "This piece of bread is the
body of the cosmos," we can say. Eating with mindfulness al-
lows you to recognize the piece of bread as the body of the
cosmos. When you eat like this, you are a new person. Allow
the new being to manifest in you. You can do this practice
by yoursel£ You can also practice this with others in order to
help your brothers and sisters renew themselves every mo-
ment of their daily practice.
      When we begin the practice, we have the gift of begin-
ner's mind. Beginner's mind is a beautiful mind. You are mo-
                                117


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
,tivated by the desire to practice, to transfonn yourself, to
 bring peace and joy into yourself. and that peace and joy be-
 '.comes contagious. Allow yourself to be a torch, and allow
  the flame of your torch to be transmitted to other torches.
  Practicing like that, you can help peace and joy grow in the
  entire world.
       The practice of resurrection should be taken up by each
  of us. When we practice it with success we will also help
  other people around us. This is the true practice of being
  alive. Whatever we do in our daily practice-walking, sit-
  ting, eating or sweeping the floor-the purpose of all these
  things is to help us become alive again. Be alive in every mo-
  ment, and by waking up yourself, you will wake up the
  world.
       Waking up is the very nature of the teaching and the
  practice. "Budh" means to wake up. We call the one who is
  awake a Buddha. The Buddha is someone who dispenses the
  teachings and the practice of awakening. Each of us can
  transfonn his- or herself into a lamp that can help the entire
  world awaken.
                                lIS


      Seven
 CONTINUING
MANIFESTATIONS




The Buddha has advised us that we should not accept any
teachings as true just because a famous master teaches them
or because they are found in holy books. This also includes
the Buddhist canon. We can only accept teachings that we
have put into practice with our own awakened understanding
and that we can see with our own experience to be true. The
Buddha said our true nature is the nature of no birth and no
death. Let us look again and see if this is true.
     If you light a candle and the flame keeps burning until
the whole candle is finished, is the candle still there or not?
The Buddha says there is no annihilation. We have seen that
this is true. And also we have seen that the concept of perma-
nence is not applicable to things as they are. So the truth lies
somewhere in between. Here, we must look deeply with all
our concentration.
     Do you think that the flame on the candle is going down
only in a vertical direction? If you think so, then you are fol-
lowing the flame in time. You may also think in this way
about your own life span: that it is going in a linear direction
and that one day it will end. You may think that you were
                               !2!


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
born on a point on a vertical line, a point you may call 1960.
You may think that you will die on a point somewhere far-
ther down on that line, which you may call 2040. All you can
see is yourself moving in time like the candle. But you are not
just moving in a linear direction.
     You might think that the flame is just going down. You
might think that the candle will die. In fact the flame is going
out in many other directions. It is giving out light all around
itself to the north, south, east and west. If you had a very sen-
sitive scientific instrument, you would be able to measure the
heat and light that the candle is sending out into the uni-
verse. The candle is going into you as an image, as light and
as heat.
     You are like a candle. Imagine you are sending light out
around you. All your words, thoughts and actions are going
in many directions. If you say something kind, your kind
words go in many directions, and you yourself go with them.
     Weare transforming and continuing in a different form
at every moment. This morning you said something unkind
to your child. With those unkind words you went into her
heart. Now you are regretting what you said. It does not
mean that you cannot transform what you have said by
admitting your mistake to your child, but if you fail to do
so, those unkind words may stay with your child for a long
time.
                                122


              CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS
                      Three Dimensions
Now I am writing a dharma book. It is made of my under-
standing and my practice. When I write a dharma book, I am
not going in a linear direction. I am going out into you, and I
am being reborn in different forms in you. In Buddhism we
talk of the three actions, the three dimensions-the dimen-
sions of body, speech and mind-at every moment of our
lives. Try to see this and understand this truth; you do not
need to wait until your body disintegrates to go on the jour-
ney of rebirth.
     At this very moment we are being born and we are dying.
Weare being reborn not in one single form but in many
forms. I would like you to imagine a firecracker. When you
light a firework it does not go down in a vertical direction. It
goes out in many dimensions, and the sparks go out in all di-
rections. So do not think that you go in only one direction.
You are like fireworks. You go out into your children, your
friends, your society and the whole world.
     In the morning when I do sitting meditation, to my left
and to my right are monks. I have been reborn in them by
sitting with them. If you look carefully you will see me in
them. I am not waiting to be reborn after I die. I am being re-
born in this moment, and I want to be reborn in a good di-
rection. I want to hand on to my lay and monastic friends
                               12 3


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
the most beautiful and happy things of my life so that they
can have a good rebirth for me and for themselves.
     Our ignorance, anger and despair should not be reborn.
When they are reborn they bring more darkness and suffer-
ing into the world. The more happiness and love that can be
reborn the better, because it will make this world more beau-
tiful and kind. Therefore you and I should be living our
weeks, days and hours in order to be reborn constantly as
happiness, love and kindness.
     One day as I woke up I remembered the words of a folk
song, "My father and mother have given me much merit."
Their merit is my generosity, love, forgiveness and capacity
to offer joy and happiness to others. They have given me this
precious inheritance. Our children are our continuation. We
are our children and our children are us. If you have one or
more children, you have already been reborn in them. You
can see your continuation body in your son or your daughter,
but you have many more continuation bodies as well. They
are in everyone you have touched. And you cannot know how
many people your words, actions and thoughts have touched.
                Giving Our Heat and Light
When the flame of the candle has given its light and its heat
all around it, that light and heat are the continuation of the


              CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS
candle. That light and heat go out in a horizontal plane. In
order to give the light and heat in a horizontal plane, it
must also burn in a vertical direction. Without the horizon-
tal dimension, there cannot be a vertical dimension. And
without the vertical dimension, there can be no horizontal
dimension.
     Ask yourself, "Where shall I go after this?" Our actions
and our words, which are being produced at this moment,
take us in a linear direction. But they also take us in a lateral
direction as they flow into and influence the world around
us. They can make the world more beautifUl and bright. That
beauty and brightness can go into the future. We should not
look for our real selves in just one vertical direction.
     When I make a pot of oolong tea, I put tea leaves into
the pot and pour boiling water on them. Five minutes later
there is tea to drink. When I drink it, oolong tea is going
into me. If I put in more hot water, making a second pot of
tea, the tea from those leaves continues to go into me. After I
have poured out all the tea, what will be left in the pot is just
the spent tea leaves. The leaves that remain are only a very
small part of the tea. The tea that goes into me is a much
bigger part of the tea. It is the richest part.
     Weare the same; our essence has gone into our chil-
dren, our friends and the entire universe. We have to find
ourselves in those directions and not in the spent tea leaves.
I invite you to see yourself reborn in forms that you say are


                   NO DEATH, NO FEAR
not yoursel£ You have to see your body in what is not your
body. This is called your body outside of your body.
     You do not have to wait until the flame has gone out to
be reborn. I am reborn many times every day. Every moment
is a moment of rebirth. My practice is to be reborn in such a
way that my new forms of manifestation will bring light,
freedom and happiness into the world. My practice is not to
allow wrong actions to be reborn. If I have a cruel thought or
if my words carry hatred in them, then those thoughts and
words will be reborn. It will be difficult to catch them and
pull them back. They are like a runaway horse. We should
try not to allow our actions of body, speech and mind to
take us in the direction of wrong action, wrong speech and
wrong thinking.
            Living Through Birth and Death
If there were not birth and death in every moment, we could
not continue to live. In every moment, many cells in your
body have to die so that you can continue to live. Not only
the cells of your body but all the feelings, perceptions and
mental formations in the river of consciousness in you are
born and die in every moment.
     I remember the day a friend brought the ashes of his fa-
                             126


               CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS
ther, who had been cremated, to the Upper Hamlet of Plum
Village. He asked to be allowed to sprinkle this ash by the
walking meditation path, and I agreed. He may have thought
that the only thing his father had left behind on the walking
meditation path was his ash. But when his father was alive, he
had walked on that path where his ashes were now sprinkled.
We performed the ceremony of sprinkling the ashes. After-
ward, I turned to the group and said, "Each of us has left our
body on this walking meditation path, not only this person
who has died, but each of us. Every time we practice walking
on this path we leave behind cells from our body."
     Whenever you scratch yourself, thousands of dead skin
cells fall to the ground. When you walk on the meditation
path, you not only leave behind the skin cells of your body,
you also leave behind your feelings, perceptions and mental
formations. Whether you spend an hour or a week in Plum
Village, after you have gone, you leave behind many traces of
yourself. The cells that you leave behind on the path become
grass and wild flowers. Your continuation body is still there
in Plum Village. It is in your children and grandchildren also.
It is in every part of the world. When the flame of the candle
reaches the end of the wick and goes out, it is still there. You
cannot find it by looking only in a linear direction. You have
to find it also in the horizontal direction.
     In the Tibetan tradition, whenever a high lama dies, fellow
                               12 7


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
monks wait a few years and then go and look for the continu-
ation body of that person. The continuation is called a tulku in
Tibetan. The high lama may have left a poem toward the end
of this life, which is thought to contain clues about where his
continuation body might be found. Using this poem, his dis-
ciples go looking for a young child who would be a suitable
candidate. They go to the house of that child, bringing with
them some instruments such as a bell, rosary or teacup that
their teacher had used. They mix them in with similar items
that he had not used. The young child has to pick out from
this assortment the instruments of the high lama who has
passed away. If he does this, then, after passing other exami-
nations, he is proclaimed as the continuation of the deceased
teacher. The monastic disciples of the former high lama ask
the parents to give permission to take the child to the
monastery so that he can continue to be their teacher for the
next generation.
     There is something very appealing about this tradition.
The disciples have so much love and respect for their teacher
that they want to keep their teacher with them after he has
passed away. I have often said to my friends in Plum Village
that they should not wait for me to pass away in order to
look for my continuation body. They have to look for me
now because I have already been reborn in many young chil-
dren. If you were standing with me now, would you see my
spiritual children beside me? They are all my continuation. I
                               128


                    CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS
have hundreds of thousands of continuations in young peo-
ple who continue the practice of mindfulness. If you look
with dharma eyes, you will see me reborn in many forms.
       Although my books and my dharma talks are not al-
lowed to be published in Vietnam, I am there. My teachings
are still circulated widely, although they are not legally al-
lowed. The security police confiscate my books and secretly
read them. Others print and publish them underground. So I
continue in Vietnam. There are young monks and nuns in
Vietnam who are practicing the dharma doors that I teach. If
you go to Vietnam you will see me there. The body that you
see here is just one manifestation of myself. My presence in
Vietnam influences the spiritual life, the culture and the young
people of Vietnam. Someone who says I am not in Vietnam
does not have dharma eyes.
       I have taught in prisons, and my books have been dis-
tributed in correctional facilities throughout the United
States. Many prisoners have read and enjoyed them. One
time I was able to visit a maximum-security prison in Mary-
land. It was so strict that not even an ant could find its way
in without being stopped. I taught the prisoners on the sub-
ject of being free wherever you are. This teaching has been
transcribed and published as a book.* Many copies have been
given to prisons so that prisoners can practice and smile,
* Be Free Where You Are by Thich Nhat Hanh. published by Parallax Press.


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
and can suffer less. They manage to find real joy even in
prison life, so I know that I am now in prison. Those prison-
ers who have practiced help other prisoners. All the prisoners
who come into touch with my teachings are my continuation
body. When you look for me, do not look at this body.
Look outside this body.
                           Fireworks
If you learn to see yourself every day going out in a lateral di-
rection and being reborn at every moment, you will be able
to find yourself in the future by looking in that lateral dimen-
sion. You are just like a firework going off in every moment.
The firework diffuses its beauty around itself. With your
thoughts, words and actions you can diffuse your beauty.
That beauty and goodness goes into your friends, into your
children and grandchildren and into the world. It is not lost,
and you go into the future in that way.
     If you look for yourself like that, you will be able to see
your continuation in the future. You will not be caught in
the idea that you will be annihilated. You will not be caught
in the notion that you will not exist anymore when you die.
The truth is that you are not permanent, but neither are you
annihilated.
     Can you see yourself being reborn every moment of the
                               13 0


              CONTINUING MANIFESTATIONS
past? All your ancestors continue in you, and when you
transform the habit energies that they have transmitted to
you, you are being reborn in the past. For instance, maybe
your ancestors had the habit of always running, needing to be
working or doing something to survive. They did not have
the time to stop, breathe and be in touch with the wonderful
things that life has to offer. You, too, used to be like that,
but you have now met the practice. Now you can stop, you
can breathe and be in touch with the wonderful things of life
for your ancestors. Maybe your genetic or spiritual ancestors
had beautiful traits that your parents or the spiritual teachers
you met during your life have failed to manifest fully. Now
you can rediscover those things in yourself, and you can re-
vive what seemed to have been lost. That is also being reborn
in the past.
     There was an American Vietnam veteran I knew. The
guerrillas had killed his comrades, and he was determined to
take revenge on the people of the village where his comrades
had died. He made sandwiches of bread with explosives in
the filling and left them at the entrance of the village. Some
children came and found the sandwiches and began to eat
them. Soon they were writhing and howling in pain. Their
parents ran to the scene, but it was too late. The area was re-
mote, without ambulances and medical equipment, and the
children could not be brought to the hospital quickly enough.
All five of them died.


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     After he returned to the United States, the soldier could
not overcome his guilt. His mother tried to comfort him.
She said, "My son, those things happen in war. There is
nothing to feel bad about." But still, he suffered so much.
Whenever he found himself in a room with children, he
could not bear it. He had to run out.
     During one of my tours in the United States, a retreat
was organized for war veterans. I taught them how to walk
and breathe in order to transform their fear, guilt and suffer-
ing. I said to this veteran, "You have killed five children; that
is true. But you can save the lives of hundreds of children.
Do you know that every day, tens of thousands of children
die for want of food and medicine? You can bring food and
medicine to some of them." He practiced as I advised, and
that person who, twenty years ago, had killed five children
was immediately reborn in the past as someone who saved
the lives of twenty children.
     Learn to look deeply like this, and your regrets and your
lack of confidence will be transformed. You will have new
energy, which will not only sparkle in the past but will also
shine in the present and the future.


        Eight
FEAR, ACCEPTANCE
AND FORGIVENESS:
  THE PRACTICE
  OF TOUCHING
    THE EARTH




Many of us spend a lot of time asking the question: "Why
do I have to die?" The more important question to ask our-
selves is: "What happens before I die?" You must go to your
beloved one and ask: "Darling, who are you? Are you the
same person as the one I married thirty years ago or are you
different? Why have you come here? Where will you go?
Why shall I have to weep one day when you die?" These are
very important questions that cannot be answered by our in-
tellect alone. We need something deeper and more complete.
      The practice ofTouching the Earth can help us touch our
true nature of no birth and no death. If we practice Touching
the Earth as the Buddha practiced, it can help us to achieve
real insight.
      It is written in the sutras that the day before Prince Sid-
dhartha became the Buddha, the Enlightened One, he had a
little doubt about his ability to become fully awake. He had
been quite confident, but then something made him question
it. So he practiced Touching the Earth. He used his hand to
touch the earth in order to transform that doubt. The next
day, Prince Siddhartha became Buddha.


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
     In Buddhist temples throughout Asia, you will see statues
of the Buddha touching the Earth with his hand. Touching
the Earth is a very deep practice that can help us transform
our fears, doubts, prejudice and anger.
                 Touching Both Dimensions
The historical dimension and the ultimate dimension of real-
ity are related to each other. If you can deeply touch one, you
can touch the other. Jesus Christ can be referred to as both
the Son of Man and the Son of God. As Son of Man, he be-
longs to the historical dimension. As Son of God, he belongs
to the ultimate dimension.
     There is the historical Buddha but there is also the Bud-
dha who is not limited by space and time. Weare all like
that. We have a historical dimension, which we live every
day, but we also have an ultimate dimension, which we try to
live using our spiritual practice. If we can live in the ultimate
dimension at the same time as we function in the historical,
we will have no more fear. When there is no more fear, there
is true happiness. A wave has a right to live her life as a wave,
but she must also learn to live her life as water because she is
not only a wave. She is also water. And water lives without
the fear carried by the wave.


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
     Touching the Earth is an easy and effective way to touch
our ultimate dimension. If you do this practice, one day you
will touch your true nature of no birth and no death. At that
time, you will be liberated from fear. You can become some-
one who rides majestically on the waves of birth and death
because you are no longer agitated by fear or anger.
                     Touching the Earth:
                 The Historical Dimension
Imagine the dimension of time as a vertical line. Place your-
self standing in the present on that line with the past above
you and the future below you. Establish yourself in time. See
all your ancestors that have come before you. The youngest
generation of your ancestors is your parents. All of them are
above you on this line of time. Then below you, see all your
descendants, your children, your grandchildren and all their
future generations. If you have no children, your descendants
are the people you have touched in your life, and all the peo-
ple they in turn influence.
     In you are both your blood ancestors and your spiritual
ancestors. You touch the presence of your father and mother
in each cell of your body. They are truly present in you, along
with your grandparents and great-grandparents. Doing this,


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
you realize you are their continuation. You may have thought
that your ancestors no longer existed, but even scientists will
say that they are present in you, in your genetic heritage,
which is in every cell of your body.
     The same is true for your descendants. You will be pres-
ent in every cell of their bodies. And you are present in the
consciousness of everyone you have touched. This is real, not
imagined.
     This is the first touching of the earth.
                         Pits and Trees
Look into a plum tree. In each plum on the tree there is a pit.
That pit contains the plum tree and all previous generations
of plum tree. The plum pit contains an eternity of plum
trees. Inside the pit is an intelligence and wisdom that knows
how to become a plum tree, how to produce branches, leaves,
flowers and plums. It cannot do this on its own. It can only
do this because it has received the experience ~d heritage of
so many generations of ancestors. You are the same. You
possess the wisdom and intelligence of how to become a full
human being because you inherited an eternity of wisdom
not only from your blood ancestors but from your spiritual
ancestors, too.
     Your spiritual ancestors are in you because what you are
                                 13 8


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
by nature and what you are by nurture cannot be separated.
Nurturing transforms your inherited nature. Your spiritual-
ity and your practice, which are parts of your daily life, are
also in every cell of your body. So your spiritual ancestors are
in every cell of your body. You cannot deny their presence.
     You have ancestors whom you admire and of whom you
are proud. You also have ancestors who had many negative
traits and of whom you are not proud, but they are still your
ancestors. Some of us have wonderful parents; others have
parents who suffered a lot and made their spouses and their
children suffer. Or you may have had spiritual ancestors who
did not help you to appreciate the religion practiced by your
family and your community. You may not have respect for
them now, but they are still your ancestors.
                           Acceptance
We need to return to ourselves and embrace our blood and
our spiritual ancestors. We cannot get rid of them. They are
a fact and they are there. They are part of our bodies and
our souls.
     When you touch the earth the first time, practice accept-
ing all your ancestors just as they are. This is very important.
Unconditional acceptance is the first step in opening the
door to the miracle of forgiveness. Jesus said, "Forgive us our
                               139


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
trespasses as we forgive those who have trespassed against us."
He understood that the first step of forgiveness is to accept
other people just as they are, even if they have harmed us.
     To accept others as they are, we must begin with our-
selves. If we cannot accept ourselves as we are, we will never
be able to accept others. When I look at myself, I see posi-
tive, admirable and even remarkable things, but I also know
that there are negative parts of me. So first I recognize and
accept mysel£
     Wherever you are standing to practice Touching the
Earth-before a rock, or mountain, or flower or altar in
your home-practice conscious breathing. Breathing in and
breathing out, you visualize your ancestors, and you see all
their positive and negative points. Be determined to accept
them all as your ancestors without hesitation. After that, you
prostrate, touching the earth with your knees, your hands
and your forehead. Stay in that position while you continue
the visualization:
     "Dear ancestors, I am you, with all your strengths and
weaknesses. I see you have negative and positive seeds. I un-
derstand that you have been lucky and that good seeds like
kindness, compassion and fearlessness were watered in you. I
also understand that if you were not lucky and negative seeds
like greed, jealousy and fear were watered in you, then the
positive seeds did not have a chance to grow."
     If positive seeds are watered in a person's life, it is partly


          FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
because of luck and partly because of effort. The circum-
stances of our lives can help us water the seeds of patience, gen-
erosity, compassion and love. The people around us can help
us water these seeds, and so can the practice of mindfulness.
     But if a person grew up in a time of war, or in a family
and community with great suffering, then that person may be
full of despair and fear. If they had parents who had suffered
a lot and were afraid of the world and other people, then
they would transmit this fear and anger to their children. If
they grew up embraced by security and love, the good seeds
nurtured in them would grow, and these wonderful seeds
would be transmitted.
     If you can look like that at your ancestors, you will un-
derstand that they are human beings who have suffered and
have tried their best. That understanding will remove all re-
jection and anger. It is very important to be able to accept all
your ancestors with both their strengths and weaknesses. It
will help you to become more peaceful and less afraid.
     You can also see your elder brothers and sisters as your
very young ancestors because they were born before you.
They too have weaknesses as well as talents, which you have
to accept because you realize that you yourself have weak-
nesses and talents. This kind of acceptance is what you real-
ize as you touch the earth. If you need to, you can maintain
the prostrate position for five, ten or fifteen minutes to look
deeply and realize this acceptance.


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
    The first Touching of the Earth may have to be repeated
several times before you can become reconciled with your
parents and your ancestors. It takes a lot of practice, but it is
important to do because, since your parents and your ances-
tors are in you, to reconcile with them is to reconcile with
yourself. To deny your ancestors is to deny yoursel£ If you
can see that you are not separate from your ancestors, that is
great progress. I am sure you can be successful after a few
days or a week of this practice.
    You can do the practice of Touching the Earth any-
where, before your ancestral altar, before a tree, a cloud, a
mountain or anywhere else you like. Standing before a rock
or a cloud or a tree or a flower on your altar, visualize the
presence of all your ancestors in you. It is not difficult, be-
cause you are in fact them. You are their continuation. Please
practice with one hundred percent of your being.
                     Touching the Future
The next step in the practice ofTouching the Earth is to look
at your descendants-your children, grandchildren, nieces
and nephews. If you have difficulties with them you should
visualize as follows:
     "I am not an entity separate from my children, because I


          FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
am continued by my children. They carry me into the fUture.
My son, daughter, friend or disciple is me."
     In the obituary notices they always write, "Mister X has
died and is survived by his sons and daughters." The idea
here is that the children continue to live for the father. My
disciples are me and I live every day in such a way as to be
able to transmit the best of myself to them because they are
going to carry me into the fUture. I have told my disciples
that they should watch the sunrise for me and I will watch
the sunset and the stars for them with their eyes. I am im-
mortal because of my disciples.
     Just as you see yourself in your parents and your ances-
tors, so you can see yourself in your son and daughter. Thanks
to your parents you have access to your source in all your an-
cestors. My disciples have access to the Buddha and ancestral
teachers through me. Thanks to your children you have access
to the fUture. The son needs his father to have access to his
source, and the father needs his son to have access to the fu-
ture and the infinite.
     This is a very concrete practice that you can do alone or
with one or two friends for mutual support. In the beginning
someone can help you by guiding your practice as you do it.
But later on you can guide yoursel£
                                143


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
                     Trying to Separate
If you have difficulties with your son or daughter, you may
have the tendency to say: "You are not my daughter. My
daughter would not behave like that" or "You are not my
son. My son would never do things like that." If you look
deeply at yourself, you will see that these negative seeds are in
you also. When you were young you made mistakes and you
learned from your suffering. When your child makes mis-
takes, you need to help him understand so he will not do it
again. When you can see your own weaknesses, you can say:
"Who am I not to accept my son?" Your son is you. With
this insight into non-duality, you can reconcile with your
children. The practice of Touching the Earth is a path to
reconciliation.
                    Right Concentration
The Noble Eightfold Path, the path of the eight right prac-
tices taught by the Buddha, has as its last component Right
Concentration. The concentration on no self, impermanence
and interconnectedness is what we realize when we touch the
earth. Without this concentration there will be no insight. If


           FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
you can see yourself, your parents and your children in the
light of impermanence, no self and interconnectedness, then
reconciliation will come very naturally.
      Give yourself time to practice Touching the Earth once a
day or even twice. You can use the following words to guide
your visualization: "Touching the earth, I connect with my
ancestors and all descendants of my spiritual and blood fam-
ilies." (Visualize thisJor a short time standing bifore your priferred object,
and then touch the earth).
     My spiritual ancestors include the Buddha, the bod-
hisattvas and the Buddha's disciples. They include my own
spiritual teachers, those still alive and those who have already
passed away. They are present in me because they have trans-
mitted to me seeds of peace, wisdom, love and happiness.
They have woken up in me my own resource of understand-
ing and compassion. When I look at my spiritual ancestors, I
see those who are perfect in the practice of the mindfulness
trainings, understanding and compassion, and those who are
imperfect. I accept them all because I see within myself
shortcomings and weaknesses also.
     Aware that my practice of the mindfulness trainings is not
always perfect, and that I am not always understanding and
compassionate, I open my heart and accept all my spiritual de-
scendants. Some of my descendants live in such a way as to in-
vite my confidence and respect, but there are those who have
                                     145


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
many difficulties and are subject to ups and downs in their
practice. I open my heart and embrace them all equally.
     In the same way, I accept all my ancestors on my mo-
ther's side and my father's side of the family. I accept all their
good qualities, all the virtuous things they have done, and I
also accept all their weaknesses. I open my heart and accept
all my blood descendants with their good qualities, their tal-
ents and also their weaknesses.
     Whatever tradition your spiritual roots are in, you can
include teachers from that tradition. If you have Christian
roots your spiritual ancestors include Christ, Christ's disci-
ples, the saints and the Christian teachers who have touched
your life. If you have Jewish roots you may want to include
the patriarchs and matriarchs and the great rabbis.
     My spiritual ancestors, blood ancestors, spiritual descen-
dants and blood descendants are all part of me. I am they
and they are me. I do not have a separate self. We all exist as
part of a wonderful stream of life.
        Meditation on the Historical Dimension
The historical dimension is the dimension of coming and
going, birth and death. When we begin to touch the historical
dimension, often we can become afraid. Weare afraid because
we do not yet understand that birth and death are not real.


                          - --
           FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
The Buddha said, "Anything that is born must die." If there
is birth, then there must be death also. If the right is there the
left must be there also. If there is a beginning, then there must
be an end. That is the way things appear to be in the histori-
cal dimension. The monks, the nuns and the laypeople in the
time of the Buddha practiced recognizing birth and death as
realities.
      In order to face our fear, it helps to stabilize the mind a
little bit through meditation and contemplation. At first, it
is easier to practice when we are guided. Breathing is the
vehicle that carries concentration. It directs your mind to the
object of your meditation. We begin through the awareness
of breathing, so that later, when we need to contemplate, we
will be able to direct the mind.
      We try to direct the mind toward recognizing reality.
This is a chant that is recited daily in Buddhist monasteries:
"Breathing in and out, I am aware of the fact that I am of the
nature to die; I cannot escape dying. I am of the nature to
grow old; I cannot escape old age. I am of the nature to get
sick. Because I have a body, I cannot avoid sickness. Every-
thing I cherish, treasure and cling to today, I will have to
abandon one day. The only thing I can carry with me is the
fruit of my own action. I cannot bring along with me any-
thing else except the fruit of my actions in terms of thought,
speech and bodily acts."
      We have to recognize this reality and smile. This is the
                                147


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
practice of facing our own fear. Fear is always there within
us-the fear of getting old, the fear of getting sick, the fear
of dying, the fear of being abandoned by our loved ones. It is
very human to be fearful and to worry about it.
     The Buddha did not advise us to suppress these fears.
The Buddha advised us to invite these fears to the upper level
of our consciousness, recognize them and smile at them. To
do so was a daily practice for monks and nuns in the time of
the Buddha as it is for monks and nuns now. Every time your
fear is invited up, every time you recognize it and smile at it,
your fear will lose some of its strength. When it returns to
the depth of your consciousness, it returns as a smaller seed.
That is why the practice should be done every day, especially
when you are feeling mentally and physically strong.
     When you try to practice, your mind may be running
after many thoughts. But just come back to the awareness of
when you are breathing in and when you are breathing out.
Just be aware of it-you do not need to make your breath
longer or deeper. You do not need to change anything. Al-
low your breath to be just as it wants to be. Keep your mind
with the breath in awareness. After practicing like that, the
quality of your breathing will calm itself.
    When you feel calm enough, use the words of the guided
meditation below to help you concentrate. The first time,
you may like to hear or say to yourself the whole sentence.
As you continue, you can just remember a few key words.


          FEAR. ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
You do not need to make a big effort. Just relax and let your
breath and the words be your support.
            EXERCISE TO HELP US LOOK DEEPLY
                   AND HEAL OUR FEAR
Breathing in, I am aware of my in-breath.        In
Breathing out, I am aware of my out-
breath.                                          Out
Breathing in, I am aware that I grow old.        Old age
Breathing out, I know I cannot escape
old age.                                         No escape
Breathing in, I am aware of my nature to
have ill health.                                 III health
Breathing out, I know I cannot escape
ill health.                                      No escape
Breathing in, I know I shall die.                Death
Breathing out, I know I cannot escape
death.                                           No escape
Breathing in, I know that one day I shall        Abandon
have to abandon all I love and cherish.          all I cherish
                              149


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
Breathing out, I know I cannot escape
abandoning all I cherish.                        No escape
Breathing in, I know that my actions of
body, speech and mind are my only                Actions true
true belongings.                                 belongings
Breathing out, I know I cannot escape the        No escaping
consequences of my actions.                      consequences
Breathing in, I determine to live my days        Living
deeply in mindfulness.                           minc!fully
Breathing out, I see the joy and benefit         Joy and
of living in the present moment.                 benefit
Breathing in, I vow to offer joy each day
to my beloved.                                   Offering joy
Breathing out, I vow to ease the pain of
my beloved.                                      Easing pain
     Acceptance, forgiveness and facing fear are the deepest
results of Touching the Earth in the historical dimension.
Using the breath this way, we can begin to heal. Then we can
look at the next Touching of the Earth.


          FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
                  Touching the Earth: Space
In the first Touching of the Earth, you practice while visual-
izing standing on the vertical line of time. Now visualize a
horizontal line, which represents the dimension of space.
This line representing space crosses the vertical line repre-
senting time, the historical dimension.
     In space we see other living beings on the planet Earth:
men, women, children, elderly people, animals of every species,
trees, plants, minerals. When we look at a tree we may think
that the tree is outside of us. But if we look more deeply we
shall see that the tree is also within us. The trees are your lungs
because without the trees you could not breathe. The trees cre-
ate the oxygen, which is now part of my body, and I create the
carbon dioxide, which is now part of the tree. We have lungs
in our body, but the trees breathe for us too and can also be
called our lungs. Our own lungs are working with the trees to
help us breathe.
     The Jataka Tales are stories about the lives the Buddha lived
before he became enlightened. In those stories we hear how
the Buddha was a tree, a bird, a tortoise, a rock, a cloud be-
fore he was a human. We too, before manifesting in human
form, were trees, one-celled animals, large animals, clouds,
forests, rocks. It is not difficult to see in the light of scientific
evolution. Matter is neither created nor destroyed. It can


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
change into energy, and energy can change back into matter,
but it won't be destroyed.
     We have always been a part of everything else, and every-
thing else has always been a part of us. We have all been
trees, roses and animals. We still are trees at this moment.
Look deeply at yourself and you see the tree, the cloud, the
rose and the squirrel in you. You cannot take them out of
yoursel£ You cannot take the cloud out of you because you
are made of seventy percent water. The continuation of the
cloud is rain. The continuation of rain is the river. The con-
tinuation of the river is the water you drink in order to sur-
vive. If you take the continuation of the cloud out of you,
you cannot continue.
                     Angels Everywhere
Looking deeply into the dimension of space, we will also see
all the enlightened beings. All the great beings, the bod-
hisattvas. We will see God. Look hard and you will see bod-
hisattvas everywhere. You will see men and women who have
compassion and who do everything they can to help and pro-
tect humanity. In Plum Village we practice evoking the names
of bodhisattvas such as Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva of
deep listening; Samantabhadra, the bodhisattva of great ac-


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
tion; Manjushri, the bodhisattva of great understanding;
Kshitigarbha, the bodhisattva who always goes to the darkest
places, where suffering is unbearable, to help all people.
     These are the bodhisattvas we know about because their
stories have been passed down to us. There are also countless
unknown bodhisattvas everywhere whose work expresses their
love, compassion and deep commitment to the world. Their
hearts are full of love, and they are not interested in consum-
ing many things. They want to live simply in order to have
time and energy to support others. They are everywhere. I
know a bodhisattva who lives in Holland. Her name is Hebe.
During World War II she helped twenty thousand Jews es-
cape the Holocaust. I do not know how she did it. Looking
at her you see that she is very small and she only has two
hands. I met her and worked with her when she was helping
with Vietnamese war orphans.
     There are also bodhisattvas who do not seem to be very
active, but they are very calm and kind and their presence in-
spires us with love, understanding and tolerance.
     There are countless bodhisattvas like that in the world.
We should live so that we have time to recognize and touch
their presence. Bodhisattvas are not gods or figures from the
past. They are living around you in flesh and blood. They
have much energy, understanding and compassl')fl, and we
can benefit from being near them.
                                153


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
     Great Beings, bodhisattvas, cannot be recognized by their
outer appearance. Sometimes they are small children who
bring us much joy. Our own children and our friends are bod-
hisattvas. Sometimes they make us suffer, but they also help
us to grow in love and understanding.
     The bodhisattvas never grow weary of the suffering
around them and never give up. They are the ones who give
us the courage to live. Kshitigarbha, who goes into the dark-
est places to help all beings, is not just one person. He has so
many manifestations in all the different hell realms, which we
can find right in this world.
     Sadaparibhuta, the bodhisattva who says, "I would never
dare to despise anyone," is also everywhere. Even if someone
does not seem to have the ability to be awakened, he sees that
within everyone there is that capacity. Sadaparibhuta helps
everyone to have self-confidence and remove any feelings of
inferiority. This kind of complex paralyzes people. Sadapari-
bhuta's specialty is to be in touch with and water the seeds of
the awakened mind or the mind oflove in us. This bodhisattva
is not just a person in the Lotus Sutra but can be found right
here in our society in many different guises. We have to rec-
ognize the bodhisattva Sadaparibhuta, who is around us in
flesh and bones.
     Manjushri is the bodhisattva who has understanding-
someone who can understand us can make us infinitely
                                154


          FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
happy. Manjushri is able to see our suffering and our diffi-
culties and never blames or punishes us. He is always beside
us to encourage us and shine light on us. Manjushri is not a
legendary figure but is present around us in many guises,
sometimes as a younger sister or brother or nephew or niece.
     We do not worship imaginary or mythological figures.
Bodhisattvas are not figures from the past living up in the
clouds. The bodhisattvas are real people who are filled with
love and detennination. When we can understand someone
else's suffering and feel love for him or her, we are in touch
with the bodhisattva of great understanding.
     The bodhisattva of deep listening, Avalokiteshvara,     1S
also around us. Psychotherapists have to learn the art of lis-
tening as deeply as bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, the one
who looks deeply with her ears. When we can listen deeply
to our children or our parents, Avalokiteshvara is already in
our hearts.
     The bodhisattva of wonderful sound, Gadgadashvara,
can use music, writings and sound to awaken people. If you
are a poet, a writer or a composer you can be that bod-
hisattva. Your artistic creations are not just to help people
forget their pain momentarily but to water the seeds of
awakened understanding and compassion in others. Among
us are many writers, poets and composers who are using the
wonderful ocean of sound to serve the way of understanding
                               155


                             NO DEATH, NO FEAR
and love by making the dhanna doors, which the Buddha
taught, more accessible. That is the meaning of one of the as-
pirations of Samantabhadra:
       I aspire to use the Great ocean oj Sound,
       Giving rise to words oj wondeiful iffect,
       That praises the Buddha's ocean oj virtues,
       In the past, the present and the future, -\I'
       When you touch the earth you connect with the great
beings because they are a part of the earth and a part of you.
Living in today's world, it is easy to become the victim of
despair. You must protect yoursel£ The best way is to be
in touch with bodhisattvas that are active in compassion
and love.
       We should be in touch with Buddhas and bodhisattvas
here today, in the present moment, and not just light incense
and pray to them. When we are truly in touch with them we
have much energy by seeing that they are in us and that we are
their continuation, not only in time but also in space. We
are one of the arms of these bodhisattvas. Our ann can
stretch very far, over thousands of miles. Our anns can reach
the darkest places on Earth. We have friends everywhere who
are our arms, and we can be their arms also.
* Ibid., 288, or the last chapter of the Flower Ornament Sutra, translated by Thomas
  Cleary.


              FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
       "Awakened understanding is the practitioner's only ca-
reer" is a quotation from the sutra on the Eight Realizations
of Great Beings.* All other careers are not really worth fol-
lowing. No honors or fame can be compared with the awak-
ened understanding that we have when we practice stopping
and looking deeply into the nature of things. When through
understanding we cease to be angry, we are already manifest-
ing the seed of great understanding from within us. Let us
live in such a way that bodhisattvas may manifest within us.
       Let us be bodhisattvas right now by the way we speak
and act. Do not think that you will be a bodhisattva later on
this evening. Evoking the names of the bodhisattvas of deep
listening, great understanding, great action and great aspira-
tion and being in touch with the qualities of these bod-
hisattvas will give us the infinite energy we need to embrace
beings who are suffering in the world.
                      Becoming the Pirate
In touching the earth, we touch the great beings, and we also
touch all the suffering beings. We must be in touch with
both. We must remember that there are beings caught in the
deepest kind of suffering, like war, oppression and injustice.
* Ibid., 286.
                               157


                        NO DEATH, NO FEAR
They have no way to speak out about the suffering and injus-
tice that they have to bear. There are pirates who are raping
young girls. There are rich merchants selling arms to poor
nations where children do not have food to eat or schools to
attend. There are factory owners who use children as their
workforce. There are people who are dying in prisons and
reeducation camps. In leprosy camps there are children and
adults without limbs, illiterate and without hope. These hell
realms need bodhisattvas.
     When we stand before the mountain or flower and visu-
alize just before we touch the earth the second time, we see
that we are not only bodhisattvas but we are also the victims
of oppression, discrimination and injustice. With the energy
of the bodhisattvas we embrace victims everywhere. Weare
the pirate about to rape the young girl and we are the young
girl who is about to be raped. Because we have no separate
selves, we are all interconnected and we are with all of them.
     How we live our life affects everything. So we must
think, How have we lived our life so that that young man in Thailand has
been able to become a rapist? We have only looked to our own ma-
terial needs. The family into which that young man was born
has been stuck in miserable poverty for many generations.
His father was a fisherman who only knew one way to forget
his troubles and that was by drinking. He did not know how
to bring up his sons, and he beat them often. His mother did
not know how to provide education for her children. At thir-


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
teen years old he had to accompany his father on the boat
and learn to be a fisherman. When his father died he contin-
ued in his father's place. He had no resources of understand-
ing and love. He was tempted to become a pirate because in
just one day a pirate can have real gold, which could lift him
out of his miserable state that he feared would go on forever.
On the ocean there was no police force, so why not follow
the example of the other pirates and rape the young girls on
the boat they plundered?
     If we had a gun we could shoot that young man, and he
would die, but would it not have been better to help him to un-
derstand and to love? Where were the politicians, the states-
men and the educators to help him?
     Last night on the shores of Thailand hundreds of babies
were born to fishing families. If those children are not prop-
erly cared for, brought up and educated, some of them will
become pirates. Whose fault is that? It is our fault: states-
men, politicians, the electorate who puts them in power and
the educators. We cannot blame only that young man. If I
had been born a poor child who was never educated, who
had a mother and a father who were illiterate, who had been
poor all their lives and did not know how to bring me up, I
could have become a pirate. If you were to shoot me dead,
would it solve anything? Who is that pirate? He could be me,
and the child he raped could also be me.
     All the suffering of living beings is our own suffering.
                               159


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
We have to see that we are they and they are us. When we
see their suffering, an arrow of compassion and love enters
our hearts. We can love them, embrace them and find a way
to help. Only then are we not overwhelmed by despair at
their situation. Or our own.
                 Don't Drown in Despair
When you are in touch with the suffering in the world, it is so
easy for despair to overwhelm you. But we do not need to be
drowned by despair. Throughout the war in Vietnam young
people easily became the victims of despair because the war
went on for so long and it seemed it would never end. It is the
same with the situation in the Middle East. Young Israelis
and Palestinians feel that the heavy atmosphere of war will
never end. We have to practice to protect our children and
ourselves from despair. Bodhisattvas can stand up and resist
despair by their ability to listen deeply, to love, to understand
and to be deeply committed. As we touch the Earth the second
time we are in contact with great and small bodhisattvas
everywhere, and we feel their energy.
    Animals, plants and minerals also suffer because of the
greed of human beings. The earth, the water and the air are
suffering because we have polluted them. The trees suffer be-
cause we destroy the forests for our own profit. Some species
                                160


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
have become extinct because of the destruction of the natural
environment. Humans also destroy and exploit one another.
According to the teachings of Buddhism, all beings have the
capacity of awakened nature. How can we stop ourselves
from collapsing in despair? It is because Buddhas and bod-
hisattvas are present in the world. They are not somewhere
else in a faraway paradise. Whether we are living or dying,
they are here, with us.
                    Benefiting Everyone
Touching the Earth helps us to purify our bodies and our
minds. It helps us to maintain the awakened understanding of
impermanence, interconnectedness and no self, The Buddha
has said that whoever sees inter-being sees the Buddha. So as
we touch the earth we see Buddhas in us and we see ourselves
in the Buddhas. We see all suffering beings in us and we see
ourselves in them. As we keep the prostrate position, the
boundary between self and other is removed. Then we know
what we should do and should not do in our daily lives. Be-
cause of this insight, we can do many things of great benefit.
     What have you done with your life? Has what you have
done been of real benefit to yourself, your loved ones and all
beings?
     The deep commitment of the bodhisattva is to relieve
                               161


                        NO DEATH, NO FEAR
suffering. It is to make a career out of becoming an Awak-
ened One, a Buddha. When we make the decision to have
our career be that of the bodhisattva, we can let go of all the
meaningless things that had attracted us before. We can let
go of fame, we can let go of having a lot of money. When we
make the decision, those things are easy to let go of.
     The Buddhas are in us; we are in the Buddhas. We can
become Buddhas. We can become enlightened.
                         GUiding Ourselves
Use the following words to guide you in the beginning of
your practice of the second touching:
     "Touching the earth, I connect with all people and all
species that are alive at this moment in this world with me."
(Visualize for a short time standing bifore your priferred object, bifore you
touch the earth,)
     I am one with the wonderful pattern of life that radiates
out in all directions. I see the close connection between oth-
ers and myself, how our happiness and suffering is intercon-
nected. I am one with those bodhisattvas and great beings
 who have overcome the ideas of birth and death and are able
 to look compassionately at the different forms of birth and
 death without fear. I am one with those bodhisattvas who
 can be found in many places on this planet. They have peace
                                    162


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
of mind, understanding and love. They are able to touch
what is wonderful, nourishing and healing, and bring it to
others. They have the capacity to embrace the world with a
heart of love and arms of caring action. I too am someone
who has enough peace, joy and freedom to be able to offer
fearlessness and joy to those around me. I do not feelloneli-
ness or despair when I feel the love and the happiness of
bodhisattvas presently alive on this earth. Seeing their love
and seeing the suffering of all beings helps me to live in a
meaningful way with true peace and happiness.
     Strengthened by the love of bodhisattvas, I am able to see
myself in all the beings who suffer. I am one with those who
were born disabled or who have become disabled because of
war, accident or illness. I am one with those who are caught
in a situation of war or oppression. I am one with those who
find no happiness in family life, who have no roots or peace
of mind, who are hungry for something beautiful and whole-
some to embrace and to believe in. I am someone at the point
of death who is very afraid, who does not know what is going
to happen and fears being destroyed. I am a child who lives in
a place where there is miserable poverty and disease, whose
legs and arms are like sticks, and who has no future. I am also
the manufacturer of bombs, which are sold to poor countries.
I am the frog swimming in the pond and I am also the snake
who needs the body of the frog to nourish its own body. I am
the caterpillar or the ant that the bird is looking for to eat, but


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
I am also the bird that is looking for the insect to eat. I am the
forest that is being cut down. I am the rivers that are being
polluted, and I am the person who cuts down the forest and
pollutes the rivers and the air. I see myself in all beings and I
see all beings in me.
      Looking Deeply at No Birth and No Death
When we begin to understand that we are everything, our
fear begins to disappear. We have deeply touched the dimen-
sions of space and time. But to really be free of fear, we must
look deeply into the ultimate dimension of no birth, no
death. We need to free ourselves from these ideas that we are
our body, and that we die. This is where we will discover the
place of no fear. This is the third Touching of the Earth.
Here is a guided meditation to help you prepare for it.
Breathing in, I know that I am
breathing in.                                        In
Breathing out, I know that I am
breathing out.                                       Out
Breathing in, I am aware of a wave on
the ocean.


        FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
Breathing out, I smile to the wave on
the ocean.                                  I smile
Breathing in, I am aware of the water in    Wtzter
the wave.                                   in wave
Breathing out, I smile to the water in
the wave.                                   I smile
Breathing in, I see the birth of the wave.  Birth if wave
Breathing out, I smile to the birth of
the wave.                                   I smile
Breathing in, I see the death of the wave.  Death
                                            if wave
Breathing out, I smile to the death of
the wave.                                   I smile
Breathing in, I see the birthless nature    Wtzter
of the water.                               not born
Breathing out, I smile to the birthless
nature of the wave.                         I smile
Breathing in, I see the deathless nature of  Wtzter
the water.                                  deathless


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
Breathing out, I smile to the deathless
nature of the water.                        I smile
Breathing in, I see the birth of my body.   Birth oj
                                            my body
Breathing out, I smile to the birth of my
body.                                       I smile
Breathing in, I see the death of my body.   My body
                                            dies
Breathing out, I smile to the death of
my body.                                    I smile
Breathing in, I see the birthless nature of Birthless
my body.                                    nature
                                            oj body
Breathing out, I smile to the birthless
nature of my body.                          I smile
Breathing in, I see the deathless nature of Deathless
my body.                                    nature
                                            oj body
Breathing out, I smile to the deathless
nature of my body.                          I smile
                               166


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
Breathing in, I see the birthless nature           Consciousness
of my consciousness.                               not born
Breathing out, I smile to the birthless
nature of consciousness.                          I smile
Breathing in, I am only aware of my
in-breath.                                        In
Breathing out, I am only aware of my
out-breath.                                        Out
                     I Am Not My Body
When I was a novice I thought that the business of going be-
yond birth and death was something very remote. I thought I
would never be able to realize it in one lifetime. But birth
and death are just ideas. All we need to do is overcome these
ideas. When I learned that, I saw that such a feat was not im-
possible. These two ideas have imprisoned us for so many
lifetimes.
      Now we see that we are more than our bodies. Now we
see that we have no life spans. We have no limits. We experi-
ence this in meditation. If we have been successful in the first
and second Touching of the Earth, this third touching is as
simple as a child's game.


                       NO DEATH, NO FEAR
      The third Touching of the Earth is like a circle placed
 around the vertical line of time in the first touching and the
 horizontal line of space in the second touching. In the first
 touching, we were released from the view that we are separate
 from our ancestors and separate from our descendants. We
 were released from our notion of time. In the second touch-
 ing, we were released from the view that we are separate from
 the Buddhas, the bodhisattvas, the Great Beings, the suffering
 beings, the animals, the plants, everything. We were released
 from our notion of space. This time we touch the earth and
 are released from the view that we are our body, and that we
 are subject to birth and death.
      Generally, we think that we are our bodies. We think
 that when our bodies disintegrate, we disintegrate. The Bud-
 dha taught clearly that we are not this body.
      I ofren ask my young friends who are not yet thirty years
 old, "Where were you in 1966 when I left Vietnam?" They
 should not reply that they did not yet exist. They have to see
 that they were around, in their parents and their grandparents.
      You can use the following words to guide you in your
 initial practice of the third touching: "Touching the Earth, I
 let go of the idea that I am this body and my life span is lim-
 ited." (Standing bifore your priferred object, visualize jor a short time be-
jore you touch the Earth.)
      I see that this body, made up of the four elements, is not
                                    168


          FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
really me and I am not limited by this body. I am part of a
stream of life of spiritual and blood ancestors that for thou-
sands of years has been flowing into the present and for thou-
sands of years flows on into the future. I am one with my
ancestors. I am one with all people and all beings, whether
they are peaceful and fearless or suffering and afraid. At this
moment I am present everywhere on this planet. I am also
present in the past and in the future. The disintegration of
this body does not touch me, just as when the plum blossom
falls it does not mean the end of the plum tree. I see myself as
a wave on the surface of the ocean. My nature is the ocean
water. I see myself in all the other waves and all the other
waves in me. The appearance and disappearance of the form
of the wave does not affect the ocean. My dharma body and
wisdom life are not subject to birth and death. I see the pres-
ence of myself before my body manifested and after my body
has disintegrated. Even in this moment I see how I exist else-
where than in this body. Seventy or eighty years is not my life
span. My life span, like the life span of a leaf or of a Buddha,
is limitless. I have gone beyond the idea that I am a body that
is separated in space and time.
     Those of you who have touched things deeply in the di-
mension of space and time will be able to touch this ultimate
dimension. After you have touched the wave, you learn to
touch the water.


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
                        No Separation
The Buddha said the nature of your reality is the nature of
no birth and no death; no coming, no going; no being, no
non-being; no same, no different. This teaching sounds as
though it contradicts the teaching that everything that is
born must die, the teaching that we cannot escape death,
sickness and old age. Practice looking deeply. You will real-
ize that birth is a notion, death is a notion, coming is a no-
tion, going is a notion, being is a notion and non-being is
also a notion. We have to remove all notions concerning re-
ality. Then we touch the ultimate reality, or suchness.
     Suchness is a technical term. It means that reality is as it
is. You cannot say anything about it; you cannot describe it.
You can say that God is the ultimate reality and anything
that can be said about God is wrong. Any notion, any idea
concerning God cannot describe God. Nirvana is the same.
Nirvana is the removal of all notions and concepts so that re-
ality can reveal herself fUlly to you. In the historical dimen-
sion, observing a wave, we can talk about the birth of the
wave, the death of the wave, the wave as being high or low,
more or less beautifUl, this wave and that wave, and so on.
Concerning the ultimate dimension, water, all the adjectives,
all the ideas that you use to describe the wave, are no longer
valid. There is no birth, no death; no this, no that; no high,
                               170


         FEAR, ACCEPTANCE AND FORGIVENESS
no low; no more beautiful, no less beautifuL The wave does
not have to die in order to become water. The wave is water
in this very moment.
     Practice this now so that you do not feel separated from
your loved one when she dies. If you have deep insight, you
will not feel abandoned. Every day I look deeply at every-
thing around me: the trees, the hills, my friends. I see myself
in them all and I know I shall not die. I will continue in
many other forms. When my friends look at me they should
see me in forms other than this visible body. This daily prac-
tice will help them not to cry when the moment comes for
my present manifestation to disappear. For when this mani-
festation disappears, it will leave room for other manifesta-
tions.
                               17 1




      Nine
ACCOMPANYING
  THE DYING


                I
               I
             I
            I
          I
         I
       I
      I
    I
   I
 I
I


Anathapindika was a very dear lay disciple of the Buddha. He
was from the kingdom of Koshala, north of the Ganga River
in the foothills of the Himalayan Mountains. Anathapindika
was a successful and respected merchant and businessman. He
was beloved by his countrymen for his generous heart. His real
name was Sudatta, but he was given the honorary title
Anathapindika, meaning, "the one who takes care of the des-
titute." This was in appreciation for his tireless efforts in sup-
porting poor people, orphans and the homeless.
     One day when he was about thirty years old, he traveled
on business to the kingdom of Magadha, where the Buddha
also happened to be staying. When he arrived in Magadha, he
went first to visit his younger sister and her husband, who were
living there at the time. He was surprised when he was not
greeted with the customary ceremony and attention. When he
asked his sister why she was not spendihg any time with him,
she replied that the entire household was busy preparing to re-
ceive a wonderful teacher who was called the Buddha. Upon
hearing the name of the Buddha, he was very curious. He asked
his sister, "Who is that?" She answered by speaking so re-
                                 175


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
spectfully about the Buddha that it inspired him to want to go
and see the Buddha as soon as possible.
     Early the next day Anathapindika went to the Bamboo
Grove Monastery, where the Buddha was speaking. The talk
moved him deeply. Bowing to the Earth, Anathapindika in-
vited the Buddha to come to his hometown to share the
teaching and practice with his friends and family.
     Although this was only the third year of the Buddha's min-
istry, he already had more than one thousand two hundred
monastic disciples. Among the monks traveling with the Bud-
dha was the Venerable Shariputra. Shariputra had already been
a well-known spiritual teacher before he became a student of
the Buddha. When Shariputra became a disciple of the Buddha,
all his younger dharma brothers and students joined him.
     The Buddha accepted Anathapindika's invitation to go
to Shravasti, which was the capital city of the kingdom of
Koshala. Anathapindika went ahead to prepare for the Bud-
dha's visit. He needed a monk to accompany him home to
help. The Buddha asked the Venerable Shariputra, who
was very talented in building community, to go with him.
Shariputra and Anathapindika, one monk and one layperson,
soon became very close friends.
     Some people think that only monastics can be close to
monastics and that only laypeople can be close to laypeople.
But this is not so. If both monastics and laypeople are moti-
vated by a deep desire to practice the mindfulness trainings


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
and to look deeply, they can be very intimate friends, co-
workers and co practitioners. There is no discrimination. A
monk can be a good monk, a layperson can be a good layper-
son, and they can also be close friends.
     Anathapindika wanted to offer the Buddha a piece of pro-
perty on which to build a monastery in Koshala. Afrer looking
extensively, he felt there was only one place beautifUl enough. It
was a lovely park belonging to a member of the royal family of
Koshala, the Prince Jeta. Since Anathapindika was very wealthy,
he thought he could convince the prince to sell him this prop-
erty. The prince had planted many beautifUl trees on the prop-
erty, so it was much more than a piece of land-it was like a
paradise. When Anathapindika came to the prince and asked to
buy the land, the prince refused. Anathapindika offered more
money, and still the prince refused. In the end Anathapindika
said: "How much do you want for it? I am ready to pay any
amount." The prince replied, "If you can cover all the land with
gold leaf, then I will sell it to you." When the prince said this,
he was actually joking. He never believed that Anathapindika
would accept his proposal, but he did.
     Anathapindika soon brought enough gold leaf to cover
the whole area of land. The prince still did not want to sell
it, but his advisors said: "You must sell it. You are a prince
of the royal family. You've already given your word and you
cannot break it."
     Prince Jeta found it difficult to understand that a spiritual
                                  177


                     NO DEATH, NO FEAR
teacher could be so extraordinary and that Anathapindika could
respect and love him so much that he would pay such a huge
sum to buy a piece ofland as a gift. People told the prince that
the Buddha, who was still a young teacher, was fully awakened
and that his teachings and his compassion were beyond com-
pare. Seeing the great faith and admiration of Anathapindika,
Prince Jeta stopped him just before he had covered all of the
land and said: "You've given me so much gold already. That's
enough. I want to offer to the Buddha the trees I have planted
on the land as a gift &om myself to the Buddha." That is why
the place is called the Anathapindika Jeta Grove. It was land
purchased and given to the Buddha by Anathapindika, but the
trees were given by Prince Jeta. The Buddha loved this park
very much and spent twenty consecutive annual rainy-season
retreats there. You can visit the park still and see the archaeo-
logical remains of ancient Buddhist monasteries.
     All during the years following his meeting with the Bud-
dha, Anathapindika continued his work helping the poor and
supporting the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha. He was
the Buddha's good friend as was the king of Koshala.
     Anathapindika had a lovely family, and his wife and two
children also became students of the Buddha. The entire fam-
ily came every week to the Jeta Grove to hear dharma talks
and enjoy the practice of mindfulness. Often Anathapindika
would bring fellow businessmen to meet the Buddha and re-
ceive his teachings. On one famous occasion, he brought more


                 ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
than five hundred businessmen to the Jeta Grove, where the
Buddha gave a dharma talk on practice of mindfulness for
laypeople. Most of the friends of Anathapindika accepted
the five mindfulness trainings. Throughout his life, Anatha-
pindika took a great deal of pleasure and happiness in sup-
porting the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha.
     Although throughout his life he experienced many suc-
cesses, there were also many difficult moments in his life.
One time he lost his entire fortune, but with the help of his
employees and friends he was able to rebuild his business and
his wealth.
     Thirty-five years after his first meeting with the Buddha, he
fell very ill. Hearing of his sickness, the Buddha came to visit
him and urged him to practice mindful breathing while lying in
bed. Then the Buddha charged the Venerable Shariputra with
taking good care of his old friend. The Buddha asked Sharipu-
tra to remain in Koshala with Anathapindika and to help him
die peacefully.
     When Shariputra learned that Anathapindika was fast
approaching death, he asked his younger brother in the
dharma, the Venerable Ananda, to go with him to see his old
friend. Ananda was a cousin of the Buddha and had memo-
rized all the Buddha's dharma talks. He is one of the main
reasons we have the teachings of the Buddha today.
     After finishing their daily alms round, the two of them
went to the house of Anathapindika. When the two monks
                                 179


                     NO DEATH. NO FEAR
arrived, Anathapindika, who needed them very much in this
difficult moment, was happy to see them. He tried his best to
sit up and greet them in a proper manner, but he could not
because he was so weak.
     Shariputra said to him, "My dear friend, don't try to sit
up; just lie down and we will bring two chairs and sit close to
you." Then, Shariputra asked, "Dear friend, how do you feel
in your body? Do you feel pain? If so, is it increasing or is it
decreasing?"
     Anathapindika answered, "Dear friend, it does not seem
that the pain in my body is decreasing. It seems it is increas-
ing all the time."
     Shariputra then said, "In that case, I suggest we practice a
guided meditation on the Three Jewels." He began to offer a
meditation on the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha, with the
support of the Venerable Ananda sitting beside him. Sharipu-
tra was considered to be one of the most brilliant monastic
disciples of the Buddha. He was like the right arm of the Bud-
dha. He was the elder brother to thousands of monks and nuns.
He knew that Anathapindika had gotten a great deal of plea-
sure over the years serving the Buddha, the dharma and the
sangha. He also knew that for Anathapindika this meditation
would water seeds of happiness in him at that difficult moment.
     He shared with Anathapindika the practice of recollect-
ing the wonderful nature of the Buddha, the dharma and the
sangha. In just five or six minutes the pain that Anathapindika
                               180


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
felt throughout his body lessened as the seeds of happiness in
him were watered. His balance was restored. Anathapindika
smiled.
     Watering the seeds of happiness is a very important prac-
tice for the sick or dying. All of us have seeds of happiness
inside us, and in difficult moments when we are sick or when
we are dying, there should be a friend sitting with us to help
us touch the seeds of happiness within. Otherwise seeds of
fear, of regret or of despair can easily overwhelm us.
     When Anathapindika was able to smile, Shariputra knew
that the balance between the joy and pain in him had been re-
stored. He invited Anathapindika to continue the guided med-
itation. He said, "Dear friend, please practice together with
Ananda and myself as follows. Breathing in, I see that this body
is not me. Breathing out, I am not caught in this body. I am life
without limit. I have never been born and I will never die."
     When you are about to die, you may not be very aware
of your body. You may experience some numbness, and yet
you are caught in the idea that. this body is you.  . You are
caught in the notion that the disintegration of this body is
your own disintegration. That is why you are fearful. You
are afraid you are becoming nothing. The disintegration of
his body cannot affect the dying person's true nature. You
have to explain to him that he is life without limit. This
body is just a manifestation, like a cloud. When a cloud is no
longer a cloud, it is not lost. It has not become nothing; it
                                lSI


                        NO DEATH, NO FEAR
has transformed; it has become rain. Therefore we should
not identify our self with our body. This body is not me. I am not
caught in this body. I am life without limit.
     In fact, we have to begin this practice with our eyes,
nose, ears, tongue, body and mind: "These eyes are not me. I
am not caught in these eyes. I am life without boundaries.
These ears are not me. I am not caught in these ears. I am life
without limit. This nose is not me, I am not caught in this
nose and I am life without boundaries." This practice helps
us not to identify ourselves with our eyes, ears, nose, tongue
and body. We explore each sense consciousness and each
sense organ so that we can see that we are not them. We are
much more than the manifestation of our sense organs. The
cessation of the manifestations does not affect us.
     Then we look at and see what else we might think is our
identity. Beyond the body and the senses are the five aggre-
gates of form, feelings, perceptions, mental formations and
consciousness. We have to look deeply at each one and say,
"These things are not me." Perceptions, feelings, ideas come
and go. They cannot be me. Consciousness, just like percep-
tions, feelings and mental formations, is just a manifestation.
When conditions are sufficient, these manifestations are pres-
ent. When conditions are no longer sufficient, these manifes-
tations are no longer present. Present or not present, these
manifestations are not me.
     Shariputra guided Anathapindika through the sense con-
                                    182


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
sciousnesses and the five aggregates, and Anathapindika saw
that they were not him. So Shariputra began the guided med-
itation on the Four Elements. He said to Anathapindika,
"Dear friend, let us continue our meditation. The element
earth in me is not me. (Here 'earth' means everything that is
solid: flesh, bones, muscles and organs.) The fire element or
the heat to keep warm and digest food is not me. I am not
caught in the fire element or the heat in me. The water ele-
ment in me is not me. There is water everywhere in and
around me. I am free of the element water. The air element
in me is not me because I am life without boundaries."
Shariputra continued like that.
     Finally, Anathapindika was guided in the meditation on
Interdependent Origination. "Dear friend, let us look more
deeply. When conditions are sufficient, my body manifests
itselE It does not come from anywhere, and after disintegra-
tion it does not go anywhere." When things manifest, we
cannot really call them being. When things stop their mani-
festation, we cannot really describe them as non-being. We
are free from notions of coming, going, being, non-being,
birth, death, same and different. It was exactly the kind of
practice and teaching that we understand when we contem-
plate a cloud, a flame or the sunflowers.
     When he had practiced to that point, Anathapindika·
began to cry. Ananda was surprised. Venerable Ananda was
much younger than Shariputra, and he was not able to see


                   NO DEATH, NO FEAR
the transfonnation and liberation Anathapindika had under-
gone in those few moments. He thought Anathapindika was
crying because he regretted something or did not succeed in
his meditation. Ananda asked, "Dear friend, why are you cry-
ing? Do you regret anything?"
      Anathapindika said, "No, Venerable Ananda, I don't re-
gret anything."
      Ananda then asked, "Maybe your practice was not suc-
cessful?"
      Anathapindika replied, "No Venerable Ananda, it was
very successful."
      Ananda asked, 'Then why are you crying?"
      Anathapindika answered with tears in his eyes, "Venera-
ble Ananda, I am crying because I am so moved. I have
served the sangha, the dhanna and the Buddha for thirty-five
years and yet I have never received and practiced such won-
derful teachings as these the Venerable Shariputra has given
me today. I am so happy! I am so freel"
      Ananda then said to him, "Dear friend, you may not
know it, but we monks and nuns receive this kind of teaching
almost every day."
      Anathapindika smiled and in his feeble voice said quietly,
"Dear Venerable Ananda, please go back to the monastery and
tell the Lord Buddha that I do understand that many laypeo-
pIe are so busy and that they will not make the time to receive
and practice this kind of teaching. But there are many of us


                     ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
  who are free enough and are available enough to receive this
  teaching and this practice. Please ask the Lord Buddha to dis-
  pense this teaching and this practice to us, the laypeople also."
         Knowing that this was the last request of Anathapindika,
  the Venerable Ananda answered him, "Of course I will do as
  you ask. I will tell the Lord Buddha as soon as I return to the
  Jeta Grove." Shortly after the visit of the two monks, Anatha-
  pindika died peacefully and without pain.
        This story is recorded in a discourse called "The T each-
  ings to be Given to the Dying."* I would like to advise anyone
  who is able to please study the discourse and to practice it.
  Please do not wait until you have to face the problem of dying
  in order to study and practice it. Please practice looking deeply
  now in order to touch your nature of no birth, no death; no
  coming, no going; no same, no different. If you do so, you will
. stop your grief and suffering. If you do this practice with dili-
  gence and effort, you will nurture the element of non-fear in
  you. You will be able to die happily and peacefully.
         It is very possible to live happily and to die peacefully. We
  do this by seeing that we continue our manifestation in other
  forms. It is also possible to help others to die peacefully if we
  have the elements of solidity and non-fear in us. So many of us
  are afraid of non-being. Because of this fear, we suffer a lot.
  That is why the reality that we are a manifestation and a con-
  • Ibid., 267.


                         NO DEATH, NO FEAR
tinuation of many manifestations should be revealed to the
dying person. Weare then not affected by the fear of birth and
death, because we understand that these are just notions. This
is a very important insight that can liberate us from fear.
      I have taken the words and teachings from the sutra to
be "Given to the Dying" in the Anguttara Nikaya and made
them into a song. It is a lullaby song that can be sung to the
person who is nearing their last breath:
      This body is not me; I am not caught in this body,
      I am life without boundaries,
      I have never been born and I have never died.
      Over there the wide ocean and the sky with many galaxies
      All manifests from the basis oj consciousness.
      Since beginningless time I have always been free.
      Birth and death are only a door through which we go in and out.
      Birth and death are only a game oj hide-and-seek.
      So smile to me and take my hand and wave good-bye,
      Tomorrow we shall meet again or even bifore,
      We shall always be meeting again at the true source,
      Always meeting again on the myriad paths oj life.
      The first line can be repeated with These eyes . .. These ears, ..
This nose . .. This tongue. . . This mind . .. Theseforms . .. These sounds . ..
etc. instead of This body (e.g., These eyes are not me; I am not caught in
these eyes .. )
                                      186


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
     Singing this song to a dying person can help them be free
from thinking that they have a permanent identity that is con-
nected to any part of the body or mind. All things that are com-
posite decompose, but our true selves do not disappear into
oblivion. This kind of guided meditation helps us to avoid
being caught in the idea that we are this body, we are this
thought, and we are this emotion. Weare actually not these
things. Weare life without limit. Weare not caught in birth,
we are not caught in death, we are not caught in being, and we
are not caught in non-being. This is the truth of reality.
     So please do not be too busy in your daily life. Please
take time to practice. Learn how to live happily, peacefully
and joyfully today. Please learn the practice of looking
deeply and understanding the true nature of birth and death
so you can die peacefully and without fear. This is something
everyone can do.
     If you can practice so that you have no fear, when one of
your friends or dear ones is dying, you will be able to help
them. You have to know what you really need to do and what
you really do not need to do. You are intelligent enough to be
able to use your time skillfully. You do not need to waste your
time doing those things that are unnecessary and trifling. You
do not have to be rich. You do not need to seek fame or power.
What you need is freedom, solidity, peace and joy. You need
the time and energy to be able to share these things with others.
     Our happiness does not rely on our having a lot of money


                    NO DEATH, NO FEAR
or fame. Our security comes from whether we practice and
keep the mindfUlness trainings. Once we have the mindfulness
trainings and the Buddha, the dharma and the sangha looking
after us, we are happy. Our two eyes are bright, our smile is
fresh, and our steps are solidly on the path of a free life. Our
happiness flows over to those around us. We do not give our
time to things that are superficial. We use our time to practice
so that the quality of our lives will be better. This is the most
precious gift any of us can leave our children or our grand-
children. This is the best that we can share with our friends.
We need time to receive, practice and learn about the wonder-
ful teachings of the Buddha, like those taught to Anathapin-
dika at the time of his death.
     Taking refuge in our family, friends and community, in
the sangha, we change our way of life. We have to live with
peace and joy right away and not wait for the future to do it.
We have to be well right now, right here, peaceful and joy-
ful in the present moment. There is no way to happiness-
happiness is the way.
     The teaching given by Shariputra should be given to
everyone early on in life. Anathapindika was very lucky to re-
ceive the teaching at the last moment. Things are imperma-
nent and we do not know in advance when we shall breathe
our last. We may not be as lucky as Anathapindika to have
good spiritual friends by our side to guide us in meditation
at the time of our death. That is why we should not leave it
                               188


                 ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
until it is too late. We should learn the practice right now so
that we will be able to guide ourselves.
                    A New Story oj Dying
In the early 1990S I was on my way to the Omega Institute in
upstate New York to lead a retreat when I learned that an
old friend of ours was dying in a hospital just north of New
York City. His name was Alfred Hassler. He had been direc-
tor of the Fellowship of Reconciliation. In 1966 and 1967, he
and I had traveled together to many countries, organizing ef-
forts to end the war in Vietnam.
     Later, I was no longer allowed to go back to Vietnam be-
cause I had spoken out in the West against the violation of
human rights by both warring parties, North and South. Al-
fred went to Vietnam in my place to help coordinate the
peace work there. He helped support our friends in setting up
camps to take care of refugees and victims of the war. We to-
gether sponsored more than eight thousand orphans. When I
came to the United States in 1966, it was the Fellowship of
Reconciliation that organized my first speaking tour. On that
tour, I called for an end to the war in Vietnam.
     When Sister Chan Khong and I arrived at the hospital,
Alfred was already in a coma. Dorothy, his wife, and Laura,
his daughter, were there with him. Laura Hassler had volun-


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
teered with us at the office of the Vietnamese Buddhist Peace
Delegation in Paris when she was very young.
     When Dorothy and Laura saw us, they were very happy.
Laura tried her best to call Alfred back from his coma.
"Daddy, Daddy, Thay is here! Sister Chan Khong is here,"
she said. But Alfred didn't come back; he was in a very deep
coma. I asked Sister Chan Khong to sing to him. A dying
person has the capacity to hear, even though we may not re-
alize it. So Sister Chan Khong sang the song that begins,
"This body is not me, I am not caught in this body, I am life
without boundaries, I have never been born, I will never die."
She sang it a second time and again for a third time. In the
middle of the third time, Alfred awoke and opened his eyes.
     Laura was so happy! She said, "Daddy, do you know
that Thay is here? Do you know that Sister Chan Khong is
here?" Alfred could not say anything. Looking into his eyes,
we felt that he knew we where there. Sister Chan Khong be-
gan to talk to him about the experiences we had working to-
gether for peace in Vietnam: "Alfred, remember the time you
were in Saigon trying to see the monk T ri Quang? The U.S.
had decided to bomb Hanoi the day before, and the Venera-
ble T ri Quang was so angry that he vowed not to see any
Westerners, either doves or hawks.
     "When you arrived he refused to open the door. Alfred,
do you remember that you sat there and wrote a note that
said, 'I have come as a friend to help stop the war in your


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
country, and not as an enemy. I will not eat anything or drink
anything until you open the door for me!' You slipped the
note under the door. You remember that? You said, 'I will sit
here until you open the door.' Do you remember? Just fifteen
minutes later he opened the door. He smiled with a broad
smile and invited you in. Alfred, remember the time you were
in Rome, and there was a vigil conducted by three hundred
Catholic priests, each one bearing the name of a Buddhist
monk who had been imprisoned in Saigon for refusing the
draft?" Sister Chan Khong continued to talk to him about the
happiness we experienced during the time we were working
for peace. It had a wonderful effect. She tried to do exactly
what Shariputra did for Anathapindika. She was watering the
seeds of happiness in him. Alfred's happiness was made of his
intention to serve peace and to end suffering for others. When
those seeds of happiness were watered, it restored a balance
between the joy and the pain in him. He suffered much less.
    At that time I was massaging his feet. I was thinking that
when a person is dying he might not be very aware of his
body because the body is somehow numb. Laura asked,
"Daddy, do you know that Thay is massaging your feet?" He
didn't say anything but looking into his eyes we were sure
that he knew we were there. Suddenly he opened his mouth
and said, "Wonderful, wonderfUl!" After that he sank into a
coma again and never came back.
    That night I had to give an orientation talk to the re-


                      NO DEATH, NO FEAR
treatants at Omega. We said good-bye and told Dorothy and
Laura that they should do as Sister Chan Khong and I had
been doing: talking and singing to Alfred. The next morning
I received a message &om Dorothy telling us that Alfred had
died quite peacefully a few hours after we left.
      Those who are unconscious have a way to hear us if we
are truly present and peaceful as we sit by their bedside. Ten
years ago a university student living in Bordeaux heard that his
mother was dying in California, and he cried a lot. He did not
know if when he arrived home in California his mother would
still be alive. Sister Chan Khong told him to fly to California
immediately and that if his mother was still alive when he ar-
rived, he should practice just as Shariputra had practiced with
Anathapindika. She told him that he should speak about the
happy experiences mother and son had shared together. He
was to recount stories from her early married life and her
youthful years. He should tell her these stories because they
would bring her joy, even if she were not conscious.
      When he arrived in the hospital, she was already uncon-
scious. Although he did not wholly believe that an unconscious
person could hear, he nevertheless did as Sister Chan Khong
had instructed him. The doctors told him that his mother had
been unconscious for a week and they had no hope that she
would regain consciousness before she died. After he had
talked to her lovingly for one and a half hours, she woke up.
      When you sit by the bedside of a dying person and you are


                ACCOMPANYING THE DYING
calm and totally present in body, mind and soul, you will be
successful in helping that person pass away in freedom.
     A few years ago, Sister Chan Khong had to visit her elder
sister in the hospital after a complication from a liver trans-
plant. After two years, her body was rejecting the liver. She
was in terrible pain. When Sister Chan Khong walked into
the hospital, she saw that everyone in the family had given up
all hope of being able to do anything. Although her sister
was unconscious, she was still writhing, groaning and scream-
ing in terrible pain. All her children, even her daughter who
was a doctor, felt powerless.
     Sister Chan Khong arrived at the hospital with a cassette
tape of the monks and nuns of Plum Village chanting the
name of the bodhisattva Avalokiteshvara, the bodhisattva of
great compassion. Although her sister was unconscious, Sister
Chan Khong put the cassette tape in the tape player next to
the bed and, after putting the headphones on her sister's ears,
turned the volume near maximum. Five or six minutes later,
something amazing happened. Her sister lay completely quiet.
She was no longer writhing, groaning or screaming. She stayed
peaceful like that until she passed away five days later.
     Throughout those five days, Sister Chan Khong's sister
continued to listen to the recitation of the name of the bod-
hisattva. She had visited Buddhist temples many times and
had heard the recitation of the name of the bodhisattva of
compassion often. Hearing it again on her deathbed watered


                    NO DEATH. NO FEAR
the seeds in her of that which was most precious and joyful
while she was alive. She had a spiritual dimension to her life
and she had faith. She had heard sutra recitations and listened
to teachings of the dharma many times. The cassette tape
playing the chanting of the monks and nuns had reached
those seeds of happiness. They were seeds that the doctors did
not know how to touch. Anyone could have done what Sister
Chan Khong did, but no one had thought to do it.
     Our consciousness is like a television with many chan-
nels. When we push the button on the remote control, the
channel we choose appears. When we sit by the bedside of a
dying person, we have to know which channel to call up.
Those who are closest to the dying person are in the best po-
sition to do this. If you are accompanying someone who is
dying, use those sounds and images from the life of the per-
son that will water the seeds of their greatest happiness. In
the consciousness of everyone are the seeds of the Pure Land
and of nirvana, of the kingdom of God and of paradise.
     If we know how to practice and penetrate the reality of no
birth and no death, if we realize that coming and going are just
ideas, and if our presence is solid and peaceful, we can help the
dying person. We can help the person not be scared and not to
suffer much. We can help the person die peacefUlly. We can
help ourselves live without fear and die peacefUlly. We can help
ourselves to understand that there is no dying. To see that there
is no death and there is no fear. There is only continuation.
                                194


THICH NHA THANH has lived an extraordinary life in an extra-
ordinary time. Since the age of sixteen, he has been a Buddhist monk, a
peace activist and a seeker of the way. He has survived persecution, three
wars, and more than thirty years of exile. He is the master of a temple in
Vietnam, the lineage of which goes back more than two thousand years
and, indeed, is traceable to the Buddha himself. The author of more than
one hundred books of poetry, fiction and philosophy, Thich Nhat Hanh
has founded universities and social service organizations, and has rescued
boat people. He led the Vietnamese Buddhist delegation at the Paris
Peace Talks; and he was nominated for the Nobel Peace Prize by the
Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. He makes his homes in France and
Vermont.


Thich Nhat Hanh has retreat communities           III southwestern France
(Plum Village), Vennont (Green Mountain Dhanna Center), and Cali-
fornia (Deer Park Monastery), where monks, nuns, laymen, and lay-
women practice the art of mindful living. Visitors are invited to join the
practice for at least one week. For infonnation, please write to:
                                 Plum Village
                                 13 Martineau
                                33580 Dieulivol
                                    France
                   NH-office@plumvillage.org (jor women)
                   LH-office@plumvillage.org (jor women)
                    UH-office@plumvillage.org (jor men)
                            www.plumvillage.org
For information about our monasteries, mindfulness practice centers, and
retreats in the United States, please contact:
                      Green Mountain Dhanna Center
                                 P.O. Box 182
                     Hartland Four Corners, VT 05049
                             Tel: (802) 436-1103
                             Fax: (802) 436-110l
                         MF-office@plumvillage.org
                            www.plumvillage.org
                            Deer Park Monastery
                              2499 Melru Lane
                           Escondido, CA 92026
                            Tel: (76o)   291-10°3
                             Fax: (760) 291-1172
                         Deerpark@plumvillage.org


SPIRITUALITY/RELIGION
  "Our greatest fear is that when we die we will
  become nothing. We believe that we are born from
 nothing and that when we die we become nothing.
 And so we are filled with the fear of annihilation.
  The Buddha has a very different understanding, that
 birth and death are notions. They are not real. "
                               -from No Death, No Fear
 With hard-won wisdom and refreshing insight. Thich Nhat Ranh
 confronts a subject that has been contemplated by Buddhist monks
 and nuns for twenty-five-hundred years-and a question that has
 been pondered by almost anyone who has ever lived: What is death?
 In No Death, No Fear, the acclaimed teacher and poet examines our
 concepts of death, fear, and the very nature of existence. Through Zen
 parables, guided meditations, and personal stories, he explodes
 traditional myths of how we live and die. Thich Nhat Ranh shows us
 a way to live a life unfettered by fear.
 "At some point in their lives, most people are haunted by the ques-
 tion 'What happens after death?' Beloved teacher, poet, and activist
 Thich Nhat Ranh takes this question to heart in his latest book about
 how to understand death and stop fearing life .... Ris advice is found-
 ed on personal examples, and guided meditations help readers grap-
 ple with the loss of a loved one, confront their mortality, and live each
 day to its fullest."                 -Tricycle
 "Simple but profound."               -The Denver Post
 "[AJ masterwork ... Thich Nhat Ranh has rendered us an invaluable
 service by opening our hearts and minds ... "
                                      -Spirituality & Health Journal
  Chosen as one of the Best Spiritual Books of the Year by Spirituality & Health
      ISBN 1 -57322 -333- 6
                            5 1 400 >
                                                www.penguin.com
    9 781573 223331
KIDS’ QUESTIONS
AND ZEN ANSWERS
       ABOUT LIFE,
   DEATH, FAMILY,
 FRIENDSHIP, AND
   EVERYTHING
     IN BETWEEN


KIDS’ QUESTIONS AND ZEN ANSWERS ABOUT LIFE, DEATH,
    FAMILY, FRIENDSHIP, AND EVERYTHING IN BETWEEN
                   THICH NHAT HANH
                ILLUSTRATED BY JESSICA MCCLURE
                              Plum BOOKS
                      PLUM BLOSSOM
                           Blossom
                       BERKELEY, CALIFORNIA
                             Books


     A good question doesn’t need to be long. If it comes
         from your heart, it can help a lot of people.
  These questions are real questions that real children have
 asked me. I always try to give an answer that offers the best
of myself. I am much older than the children who asked these
  questions, but when we sit and breathe together, it seems
   that we are the same. We are each other’s continuation.
                     THICH NHAT HANH


Why does the
world exist?             Is nothing             What does God
                        something?                 look like?
                                                                               How long am I
                                                                               going to live?
    Why is the sun
        so hot?
                                    What is
                                                            Why are there good
                                 mindfulness?
                                                              days and why are
                                                               there bad days?
    Why do we have to
 recycle things? Can’t we            Why do people
  just throw them away?                make wars?                         I love my
                                                                    grandfather but he
                                                                     died. How can he
                                                                     still be with me?
       How can I remain
      calm when I see so                  How can I love
      many bad things in                                                        Why do I
                                        someone who likes
           the world?                                                       sometimes feel
                                    different things than me?
                                                                          lonely and that no
                                                                             one loves me?
   How can I control
       my temper?                 What do you do when                  How can I stop
                                       you’re scared?               worrying so much?


                             What should you do if
What should I do            someone feels bad and                Why do kids
when I feel sad?           you want to comfort that               watch TV?
                           person and make him or
                                her feel better?
                                                                       How do you know
                                                                       if somebody is a
   When my parents                                                        real friend?
                                       Why is my brother
divorced, they fought                   always so nasty
 a lot. Why can’t they                     toward me?
     live together?
                                                                         I just moved to a
                                                                      new school. How do I
                                                                           make friends?
   I’m having a problem              Why do I sometimes
   with someone, but I’m             feel that everyone is
  too shy to speak to this                against me?
   person. What do I do?
                                                                        Why don’t monks
                                                                      and nuns eat meat?
                                       Why do people
                                      sometimes listen
  What is meditation                 to a bell when they
       and why do                         meditate?
      people do it?
                                                                               Mindful
                                                                              Breathing
                                   Who is
        Who was the                                        May I give
                              Thich Nhat Hanh?
           Buddha?                                         you a hug?               Mindful
                                                                                    Walking


Why does the world exist?
Nobody knows why the world exists, but we can still appreciate
it. There are so many wonderful things in the world. Your body is
a wonder. The flower is a wonder. The stars are wonders. If you
only notice the unpleasant things, that’s a pity. Even the things
that don’t look beautiful at first are wonders. A lotus flower
grows in mud. If there were no mud, there would be no lotus. So
the lotus flower is a wonder and the mud is also a wonder. When
you are aware of the wonders around you, life is full of joy.


Is nothing something?
Yes. Nothing is something. You have an
idea in your head of nothing. You have an idea in
your head of something. Both are things that can
create either suffering or happiness.


What does God look like?
God expresses him- or herself in many
ways. We can see God in a flower, in
the sun, in a river, and in our friend.
God doesn’t have a particular form;
God is always expressed in the beauty
of the here and the now.


How long am I going to live?
Here is some good news. If you look deeply into everything, you can see
that you will live forever. You will never die; you’ll just change form. You
are like a cloud. A cloud can become snow or rain, but it can’t die. You are
like a wave in the ocean. After you rise and fall as a wave, you will still be
part of the ocean. Your shape will change but you won’t disappear.


Why is the sun so hot?
Every single thing has its own nature, the way it’s supposed to
be. If the sun wasn’t hot enough, living things wouldn’t be warm
enough and we would die. We need the sun to be hot just like
we need the tree to be green and we need people to be gentle.
Children can practice being kind and gentle by walking and
breathing mindfully. Then they are doing their part and the sun
is doing its part and we are helpful to each other.


What is mindfulness?
Mindfulness is energy. This energy helps us enjoy what is happening
right now. Mindful energy can bring us a lot of joy. It helps us suffer
less and learn from our suffering. A good way to get some mindful
energy is to close your eyes and breathe easily. Just pay attention to
your breath. If you can enjoy your in-breath and out-breath, you are
creating mindful energy.


Why are there good days and
why are there bad days?
We say, “Have a good day,” to people because we want them to
enjoy being alive that day. But sometimes things happen that we
can’t help. We may break or damage something. Someone may
be mean or unfriendly to us. When these things happen, it’s easy
to forget to be aware of our breathing.


We forget how good it feels to walk on the Earth. Our minds
can get stuck on the bad thing that happened and what is going
wrong, and we forget what is good and what is going right.
    It helps to remember our mindful walking and mindful
breathing. Our mindfulness is like magic that turns a bad day
into a good one. When we remember to breathe and walk
mindfully, it feels so good that our bad feelings just dissolve.
    There is a way to start the day and make sure it will be a
good one right from the beginning. Before leaving home in
the morning, you and your family can sit down together. If you
have a bell, all of you can listen to the bell calmly. Then you can
practice mindful breathing and say to yourself: “Breathing in, I
calm myself; breathing out, I smile.” If you start the day like this,
your day will go better.


Why do we have to recycle
things? Can’t we just throw
them away?
We don’t want this beautiful planet to become
  a mess. We have to preserve the beauty and
   freshness of this planet so that the children
   who will be born later will also be able to
  enjoy it and not be surrounded by garbage and
by air that is hard to breathe.
    Your anger and jealousy are also like
garbage. With mindfulness, we can recycle
these strong feelings and transform them back
into friendship.


Why do people make wars?
People fight each other because they have anger, fear,
and craving inside themselves. They want more wealth
and resources than they have, and they believe that they
can get more of what they want by hurting others. Fear
and anger are born from misunderstanding. If we want
more peace in the world, we can start by taking care of the
misunderstanding in ourselves.


I love my grandfather but he died. How can
he still be with me?
If your loved one isn’t there in his familiar form, look for him
in his new forms. A kernel of corn grows into a corn stalk, and
the stalk makes an ear of corn, which contains new kernels.
Your grandfather is like the original corn kernel and you are
the new corn kernel. In this way, you are his continuation. Your
grandfather is still alive in every cell of your body. You can have
as many conversations with him as you want.


How can I remain calm when I see so
many bad things in the world?
Whenever I see violence or cruelty, it still makes me angry.
We all get angry sometimes. But we can learn to take care
of our anger. If we look closely, we can notice that people
who are cruel have a lot of suffering inside. When we see
this, we can be compassionate, and help the situation by
creating peace, even if what is happening around us is not
very peaceful. We can use our breath and our mindfulness to
transform the energy of anger into the energy of compassion.
When we have the energy of compassion, we can do a lot of
things to help people suffer less.


How can I love someone
who likes different things
than me?
To love is to discover. If you keep on
loving another person, you will keep
discovering wonderful things about that
person. You can enjoy the differences
because it would be boring if everyone
were the same. Even if the other person
has a quality that doesn’t seem lovable,
you can practice loving that person
anyway, just as they are, and not how
you wish they were.


Why do I sometimes feel lonely and that
no one loves me?
Sometimes the people around you are distracted and may
forget to express their love. But if you feel like no one loves you,
you can always look outside at the natural world. Do you see
a tree out there? That tree loves you. It offers its beauty and
freshness to you and gives you oxygen so you can breathe. The
Earth loves you, offering you fresh water and delicious fruit for
you to eat. The world expresses
its love in many ways, not
just with words.


How can I control my temper?
The very first thing we can do when we’re angry is to
notice we’re angry. Sometimes we’re angry, but we don’t
want to accept it. When I’m angry, I like to stop and
become aware of my breath and say,


Breathing in, I know anger is in me.
Breathing out, I will take good care of my anger.
      Once we’re aware of our anger, we can be gentle with it. Don’t
      try to control your anger. As soon as you try to control it, this
      may start a fight between you and your temper. Instead, just
      be with it and accept it. Once you’ve sat with your anger for
      a while, you will find that it doesn’t need to explode. It will
      transform on its own, without hurting anyone.


What do you do when you’re scared?
Usually, when we’re afraid, we try to run away from whatever
scares us. When I am scared, I breathe deeply and calm
myself. I try to stop my thinking and just breathe. This always
helps me. Every time I have an upset stomach, I fill a hot
water bottle and I put it on my stomach. In five minutes I feel
much better. My mindful breathing is like a hot water bottle
for my mind. Every time I apply mindful breathing to my fear,
I get relief.


How can I stop worrying so much?
When we worry, it’s usually about something that has already
happened or something that we think might happen in the
future. But all we can take care of is the present moment.
Suppose we are traveling and we know we will have to cross a
bridge. We can’t cross the bridge until we get there. If we spend
our time thinking about how to cross the bridge, we’ll miss out
on the journey. If we stay in the present moment, then when we
finally get to the bridge, we can cross without fear.


What should I do when I feel sad?
A wonderful thing to do is smile to your sadness. This is a
very simple practice but it has a great effect. Your smile is
like the sunshine. There can be sunshine with the rain. You
can smile and cry at the same time and it will be like you are
making a rainbow.


What should you do if someone feels bad and
you want to comfort that person and make
him or her feel better?
One of the simplest and most loving things you can do for someone
who feels bad is just to be with them and breathe with them. You
can say, “I am here for you.” You are offering your presence, which is
the most wonderful gift you can offer another person.


Why do kids watch TV?
Sometimes when the grown-ups who are taking care of the
children are too busy, a television or a video game becomes a
babysitter. But it is not usually a good caregiver. There are many
messages of violence and greed on the screen that we absorb
without realizing it. If we watch a screen a lot, we forget to
enjoy all the beautiful things around us. If we save screen time
for special occasions, we will enjoy those times more.


When my parents divorced, they fought a
lot. Why can’t they live together?
If our parents separate, it’s not because they want to make
us suffer but because they have difficulties that they can’t
overcome. Living together is not easy. If you are still a kid and
you start practicing love and understanding now, it may be
easier to live with other people when you grow up because you
will have had a lot of practice with compassion.


Why is my brother always so
nasty toward me?
Someone who is nasty is someone who is not very
happy. When you are happy you are not mean to
others.
     Take a quiet moment and ask yourself, “Why
is that person being mean? Why is that person
unhappy?” You can also ask yourself if you are
ever mean to your brother.
     It can be a challenge to be patient with our
brothers and sisters. We usually think the other
person is wrong and we want them to change. But
we are also partly responsible for their behavior. If
we are more compassionate, more patient, more
loving and more understanding, we can help our
siblings change more quickly. In order to change
our siblings, we have to change ourselves first.




How do you know if somebody
is a real friend?
It takes time. In everyone there is a seed of loyalty
and there is a seed of betrayal. If we strengthen
our own loyalty and are loyal to our friends, we will
encourage them to be loyal as well. So instead of
worrying whether the other person will betray us
one day, we can help that person to cultivate more
loyalty and he or she will stay with us and be our
friend for a long time.


I’m having a problem with
someone, but I’m too shy to
speak to this person. What
do I do?
You can write down your question or your
concern, and why it is bothering you, and
you can give it to him or her in writing.


Why do I sometimes feel that everyone
is against me?
Don’t wait for other people to accept you. You can learn
to accept and love yourself. When you do this, you will
be more focused on giving your love to others and less
focused on how others feel about you. People will see
this and they will be more able to express their love and
appreciation for you in turn.


I just moved to a new school.
How do I make friends?
A new school can be very exciting. Don’t
worry. Just allow things to happen. New
friends will come to you, if you are ready.
When you go to the mountains for vacation,
you will discover many beautiful trees and
flowers and things that you have never
seen before. You can’t predict what you will
see. A new school is like that.




What is meditation and why do
people do it?
To meditate is to concentrate and look inward. You
can sit down to meditate but you can also meditate
while walking to school, lying in the grass, or
resting in your bed at night. If you are quiet and
enjoying your in-breath and out-breath, you’re
practicing meditation. If you know how to smile
beautifully and without effort, then you know how
to meditate. It’s not difficult.
     If I ask you why you eat ice cream, you would
say, “Because I like it.” Meditation is the same. I do
it because I like it. To meditate is to have fun.


Why do people sometimes listen to
a bell when they meditate?
The sound of the bell is the sound of a friend calling
you back to the present moment. Any sound that
reminds you to pay attention to your breathing is
a bell of mindfulness. The school bell, the sound
of a phone ringing, a clock chime, or a timer in the
kitchen are all good bells of mindfulness.


Why don’t monks and nuns
eat meat?
We don’t eat meat because we want to reduce the
suffering of living beings. Human beings suffer,
but animals also suffer. So eating vegetarian
food is one of the ways to lessen the suffering
of living beings. Knowing this, we don’t suffer
when we refrain from eating meat. In fact, we
feel wonderful when we can follow a vegetarian
diet because we feel that we can cultivate more
compassion, more love. Even if you are not a
monk or a nun, if you eat less meat
it shows your concern and love
for other living beings and for
our planet.




Who was the Buddha?
There are many buddhas, but the buddha who is
most well-known on Earth was a human being
named Siddhartha who was born about 2,600
years ago in a small kingdom called Shakya, which
is in present-day Nepal. Siddhartha was a prince.
When he saw that the people around him suffered
so much, he went to the forest and practiced
for many years to figure out how to help people
suffer less. After sitting in meditation for a long
time, he became the Buddha, which means “the
awakened one.”
     There is a buddha, a compassionate, awakened
person, already inside each of us. Whenever
we forgive someone, or love someone, or are
compassionate and kind, we are already a buddha.
Every living being can become a buddha, not just
people, but birds, fish, deer, and every animal
we know.


Who is Thich Nhat Hanh?

Where are you from?
I am from many places. I come from my father; I come from my
mother; I come from my teacher; and I come from the air, from
the clouds, and from the Earth. I have come from many places.
How old are you?
I am the continuation of the Buddha, so I am 2,600 years old.
     I am also the continuation of my father, who would be over
100 years old today if he were still alive.
     At the same time, I am a continuation of you, who asked the
question, so I am also six years old.
How are you?
I am like this: calm enough and happy being in the here and now.
Where do you live and what do you do there?
I live in a community in the southwest of France called Plum
Village. There are many monks and nuns there. There are also
many people who aren’t monks and nuns who stay and practice
with us. We live together. We wake up at the same time in the
morning and we practice mindful sitting, walking, cooking, eat-
ing, washing up, and working together all year round. We enjoy it
very much.
     From time to time, we go to another country to visit and
teach so we have made a lot of friends all over the world. Our
friends are our spiritual family, so we think of our family as
being everywhere.


What’s it like in Plum Village?
It’s difficult to describe, so you should come visit. When someone
who has never eaten an orange asks, “What does an orange taste
like?” it’s so difficult to describe. So please come and experience it
for yourself.
Do you play sports?
I used to play soccer and ping-pong a lot and I still like to play
ping-pong now and then. But most of all I like walking mindfully.
How do you give talks to so many people without
getting nervous?
How do you know that I don’t get nervous? I remember the first
time I had to stand up and give a talk, I was scared. But with prac-
tice, I started to feel less nervous and my talks got better. So the
answer is to keep practicing.
I was wondering if you like your job.
I do.
How did you choose to be a monk?
I have a seed of monkhood in me. When I was a little boy, I saw a
drawing of the Buddha on the cover of a magazine. He was sitting
very peacefully on the grass. This impressed me very much, be-
cause the people around me were very nervous and not calm and
happy at all. That was the first time I wanted to become a monk.
Being a monk is one of the ways to become a buddha. Being a
monk, you don’t need a big salary. You only need enough money
to buy toothpaste, or to call your family, or to visit them from time
to time. You don’t need much money. So you don’t need to work


all that much. You devote a lot of your time to helping people who
come to you so they can learn how to practice mindfulness. You
take care of them and show them the way to sit, to walk, and to
breathe mindfully. When you can help people so they suffer less,
when you can make them smile, you feel great. You feel rewarded.
But you can be a buddha even if you are not a monk. You can be a
buddha in your regular life today.
Why do monks and nuns shave their heads?
There are many ways of answering that question. One way would
be to say that we don’t want to spend too much money on sham-
poo! Another answer is that we want to let people know we are
already a monk or a nun so they should not try to make us their
wife or their husband. Also, monks and nuns want to be remind-
ed that they are monks and nuns. So when we look in the mirror
or touch our heads, we are reminded that we don’t have hair and
we remember the vows we have made as monks and nuns.
Why do you bow to your meals?
I bow before I eat because I want to express my gratitude. There
are so many who are hungry in the world. If I have the chance to
have food to eat every day, I feel grateful.
Do you remember any of your past lives?
Yes. When I practice looking deeply, I see that at one time in the
past I was a rock, a tree, a squirrel, a bird, a fish, a cloud, and a
river. If I continue to look deeply, I see that I am still a rock, a
cloud, a mountain, a river, and a squirrel; I continue to be them. I
have been all these kinds of beings and so have you. We continue


to be all of them. They are still in us. We inter-are with them.
    You may think that you are only a human being. But if you
look deeply, you can see that you are also a cloud. Drinking a
cloud is what we do every day, but we don’t realize it. The cloud
becomes the rain; the rain becomes the water; and you drink a
cloud in the form of tea, or water, or juice. With the practice of
looking deeply, we can see our former lives. We continue to carry
our former lives with us in the present moment.
Have you ever hurt someone on purpose?
I have hurt people through lack of mindfulness and through
ignorance, but not with the intention of making the other person
suffer. I don’t want to make anyone suffer, but because I’m not al-
ways calm enough, or mindful enough, I have hurt others. I have
done that a few times, and I always regret it. I vow to myself that I
will be more careful and I will not do it again next time.
When did you start practicing peace?
I used to try to create peace, but I was not successful. Then, one
day I realized that breathing in and breathing out mindfully could
help bring peace to my body and mind. That was the day I truly
started practicing peace.


May I give you a hug?

Mindful Breathing
Everyone can practice breathing mindfully. Just breathe slowly and gently
and notice the air as it goes in and out of your body. Mindful breathing
can help us enjoy the moment and notice when we are happy, healthy,
loved, and safe. Mindful breathing can also help us calm and comfort
ourselves when we are hurt, sad, frightened, or angry.
     Put a finger under your nose and feel the air as it passes in and out
of your nostrils. Try it right now! The air you breathe in is cool and fresh.
The air you breathe out is moist and warm. Sit up straight, relax, and put
your hands on your belly. Feel how it moves in and out, expanding when
you breathe in and relaxing when you breathe out.
     Try lying down on the floor and feeling your belly rise and fall. Place
a toy animal, a flower, a feather, or a small paper boat on your belly and
watch it ride the waves as you breathe in and out, allowing the air to go
all the way down to your abdomen and out again.
     If you really want to be good at mindful breathing, you have to
practice regularly. You can practice anytime and anywhere: in a quiet
spot at home, waiting for dinner, outside, in the car, or on the bus going
to school, even in the classroom.
     Here is one way to practice: Make sure you are comfortable and that
you can breathe easily. You can close your eyes if you want to. Then just
notice your breathing, in and out. Don’t change it, just notice if it’s long
or short, deep or shallow, fast or slow. While you are following your
breathing, you can imagine you are a fresh and beautiful
flower, a strong and stable mountain, or a still, calm
lake. Inside you there is a lot of space.


Mindful Walking
An elephant is so big and heavy and yet it walks gently and softly. A
cat can leap quickly, but its body is relaxed and supple. Animals don’t
worry when they walk. They don’t drag their feet. Imagine you have
huge feet like a kind and gentle elephant, or the soft paws of a sleek cat,
or the long legs of a proud ostrich, its head held high.
     Begin by walking slowly. Don’t get distracted with talking or
thinking about things. Take one step and breathe in; take another step
and breathe out. Relax and feel the contact of your feet with the Earth.
Feel the soles of your feet as they touch the ground. Notice how your
foot rolls from heel to toe and then lifts up. Feel your feet carrying all
the weight of your body. Put all your weight on one foot and then on
the other. Can you stop and lift up one foot mid-stride without losing
balance, like a flamingo? Walk softly and gently, as if you are kissing
the Earth with each step. By walking mindfully, you are thanking the
Earth for giving you the food, air, water, and beauty you need to live.
     We can practice walking mindfully anywhere. Walking down the
street or walking to the bathroom, we can focus on breathing and
walking calmly and not rushing. We can just enjoy walking and not
rush to get anywhere. If we are outside, we may notice the tiny ants, the
caterpillar, the slug, or the snail on our path. Don’t step on them! They
are our friends and companions. When we walk mindfully, we get to
really enjoy being alive on this planet, wherever we are.


                     Plum
 Plum Blossom Books, the children’s imprint of
                 Blossom
Parallax Press, publishes books on mindfulness
                    Books
   for young people, parents, and educators.
                  Parallax Press
                   P.O. Box 7355
             Berkeley, California 94707
                  parallax.org


Plum Blossom Books is the children’s imprint of Parallax Press.
              © 2014 by Unified Buddhist Church
                       All rights reserved.
                       Printed in Malaysia
   No part of this book may be reproduced in any form or by
  any means, electronic or mechanical, without permission in
                   writing from the publisher.
                   Edited by Rachel Neumann
 Illustrated by Jessica McClure / jessicamccluredesigns.com
           Cover and interior design by Debbie Berne
This eBook was created using the first print edition from 2014.
                eBook ISBN: 978-1-937006-66-2
                    1 2 3 4 5 / 18 17 16 15 14


Parallax Press is a nonprofit publisher, founded and inspired
by Zen Master Thich Nhat Hanh. We publish books on mind-
  fulness in daily life and are committed to making these
   teachings accessible to everyone and preserving them
  for future generations. We do this work to alleviate suf-
    fering and contribute to a more just and joyful world.
         All of Thich Nhat Hanh’s work is available at
         our online store and in our free catalog. For
             a copy of the catalog, please contact:
                         Parallax Press
                         P.O. Box 7355
                      Berkeley, CA 94707
                      Tel: (510) 525-0101
                       www.parallax.org


To reach mindful living communities following the
   tradition of Thich Nhat Hanh please contact:
                     Plum Village
                    13 Martineau
               33580 Dieulivol, France
                www.plumvillage.org
             Magnolia Grove Monastery
                   123 Towles Road
                Batesville, MS 38606
         www.magnoliagrovemonastery.org
                 Blue Cliff Monastery
                 3 Mindfulness Road
                Pine Bush, NY 12566
            www.bluecliffmonastery.org
                Deer Park Monastery
                   2499 Melru Lane
                Escondido, CA 92026
            www.deerparkmonastery.org


        A Free Excerpt from
    Answers From the Heart,
         Thich Nhat Hanh's
       Question and Answer
           Book for Adults
Parallax Press is the publishing division of
      Unified Buddhist Church, Inc.
   © 2009 by Unified Buddhist Church
            All rights reserved
     print ISBN: 978-1-888375-82-4
    e-book ISBN: 978-1-935209-00-3




Contents
  7 INTRODUCTION
 13 CHAPTER 1 Daily Life
 37 CHAPTER 2 Family, Parenting, and Relationships
 65 CHAPTER 3 Spiritual Practice
 95 CHAPTER 4 Engaged Buddhism
127 CHAPTER 5 Sickness and Health, Death and Dying
145 CHAPTER 6 Children’s Questions
171 CHAPTER 7 Practices for Daily Mindfulness


Chapter 2
Family, Parenting,
and Relationships
Q. How can we ensure that our home lives remain
peaceful even when the world outside is not?
A . In every home there should be a room, you can
call it the breathing room or the meditation room or
the island of peace. Many of us do not have extra
space or an additional room that we can use just for
this. In that case, even a small corner of a room can
function as a peaceful island. Any time members of
the family don’t feel safe or stable or strong, they can
take refuge in that island of peace. It doesn’t need to
be very big and it doesn’t need a lot of furniture; just
a few cushions, a bell, and a flower. The flower repre-
sents freshness and beauty and hope.
     Every time you’re disturbed by your anger or frus-
tration, even if you’re a child, you have the right to
take refuge in that room. Any civilized home should
have such a room. That is a territory of peace, a place
to take refuge in the island of self. The moment this
“island” is established, you, and others too, begin to
profit from it. When you step into that room, you


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
feel a territory of peace within.
    If parents are quarreling and causing their child a
lot of suffering, the child may like to leave that place
and go to the breathing corner or room. She can
enter, invite the bell, and practice mindful breathing.
She can take refuge in the peace that is there. And
if the child is practicing like that, the parents may
stop quarreling with each other when they hear the
bell and feel the need of the child not to suffer. So the
practice of one person can help the rest of the family.
    When one partner is angry with the other, she
can go to that room and practice mindful breathing
and listening to the bell to calm herself. That prac-
tice will inspire the child and inspire the couple also.
Before starting the day, the whole family might spend
a few minutes in the breathing room looking at each
other mindfully and happily and wishing each other
a happy day. You will have started your day well by
calming yourself, looking at each other, and recog-
nizing each other as precious. Before going to sleep,
you can spend a few minutes listening to the bell and
breathing in and out together as a family. And every
time the family has the need to listen to each other,
you can use the place to practice sitting mindfully and
listening deeply to the suffering of the family. When
the child takes refuge in that territory, the father has


                              Family, Parenting , and Relationships
no right to pursue him and call after him anymore.
You have something like diplomatic immunity when
you go into that territory; no one can scold you or
ask you questions anymore.
Q. How can we raise our children to be more mind-
ful and compassionate?
A. If parents practice mindfulness and compassion in
their daily lives, the children will naturally learn from
them. We can’t tell a child to do something if we don’t
do it ourselves. When I walk mindfully and breathe
mindfully, my disciples follow me, walking mindfully
and breathing mindfully. Sometimes I must remind
them gently, but it’s natural that when they see an elder
practicing, they follow the practice. From time to time
parents might discuss mindfulness and compassion
with their children, and express their wish that their
children will continue living in mindfulness and with
more compassion.
    When you use loving speech, you can water the
good seeds in your children and inspire them to do as
you have done. You don’t have to punish or blame them.
With right speech and by following your own practice,
your children will see, and they will follow you.


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
Q. My adolescent daughter is anxious and easily
upset . What can I do to calm her troubled emo-
tions?
A . Many young people can’t handle their emotions.
They suffer a great deal. What parents can do is to
teach their children that emotions are like a storm;
they come, they stay for a while, and then they move
on. If we know how to be our best during these
moments, we can weather the storms more easily.
    The practice of deep breathing, breathing with the
belly, can help them deal with strong emotions. It’s
quite possible to teach your child to do this. When
you see her in crisis, you sit down with her and say,
“Darling, take my hand; let’s practice breathing in
and out: Breathing in, your stomach is rising. Do you
see your stomach rising? Breathing out, your stom-
ach is falling. Let’s do it again: In, out, rising, falling.”
In a few minutes she will feel much better because
you have brought your mindfulness and your stabil-
ity to support her. Later on she will be able to do this
by herself. The practice isn’t difficult. Young children
and teenagers can learn it.
    We shouldn’t wait for strong storms to arrive
in order to start the practice. This practice should
be initiated right away. If you continue to practice


                           Family, Parenting , and Relationships
together for two or three weeks, every day for five or
ten minutes, the practice of deep, non-thinking belly
breathing will become a habit. And after that, when
the emotion is about to come up, the child will know
what to do. She will see that she can easily survive
her emotions.
Q. My teenage son and I argue all the time. How
can I stop these fights?
A. The first thing you can do is to look at yourself,
to see whether you have enough calm energy to help
calm him when he is in your presence. The problem
may not only be with the child, but within the par-
ent. If the parent is not peaceful, this can trigger
negative emotions in the child, especially if there are
negative seeds planted in him. In the past there may
have been times when you got irritated and reacted
in a state of annoyance—this has deposited those
seeds in him. You have to undo this in the pres-
ent moment. Being loving and calm and having the
capacity to listen can absorb a lot of suffering. If you
can engage him to talk to you about his difficulties
by practicing deep, compassionate listening, that
will help remove the kinds of energies that are mak-
ing him suffer. If you have loving kindness and the


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
energy of peace in you, even without speaking you
can influence another person and he or she will feel
better just sitting with you.
Q. Some people say that mothers who work outside
of the home don’t take good care of their children.
But what if a woman stays home and still doesn’t
pay much attention to her children? How can we
parent while still doing the other things in our life
that require attention?
A . There should not be any oversimplification of the
problem; we can do both. If you manage to provide
your child with enough affection, of course you can
go and work. Affection is crucial for communication
and understanding. Affection brings about love, and
love brings about deeper understanding, and deeper
understanding brings about more love.
     Many parents need to work outside the home
for financial reasons. Many also enjoy working. But
staying home and taking care of the children and the
home, and being a haven that’s refreshing and heal-
ing for others in the family is also very important
work. We shouldn’t evaluate the value of our self or
our work in terms of salary alone. We all have to learn
how to be in such a way that can bring about solidity,


                            Family, Parenting , and Relationships
confidence, faith, and joy.
    If a parent who stays home is not able to bring
about that quality in the environment, then staying
home is not a positive thing. The parent who goes out
to work and who comes home still fresh, loving, and
smiling knows how to preserve her quality of being.
The value of the action depends very much on the
value of non-action, namely the quality of our being.
Q. I had abusive parents and I’m still very angry
with them. How can I avoid passing this anger on
to my own children?
A . If you’re a victim of childhood abuse, practice
looking deeply to see that your parents did not have
a chance to encounter the Dharma or a wise teacher
or to have good friends. They may have been brought
up in an environment that allowed the seed of abuse
to manifest. If they had lived in a better environ-
ment, they might have behaved differently. That is
true of everyone. Now, since they have transmitted
that negative seed to you, and you are determined to
practice in order not to repeat their mistakes, not
only will you not abuse your own children, but you
will help other people of your generation to protect
children. And with that intention, making that vow,


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
you’ll be able to heal and transform your suffering,
including the suffering that’s been caused by your
parents’ abuse.
    Learning to look with the eyes of compassion is
a precious, wonderful teaching. If you know how to
look at other people with the eyes of compassion,
you don’t suffer anymore, and your way of looking at
others makes them feel better. It’s a wonderful thing
to practice. The first verse in the book of practice for
novices is, “Waking up this morning, I smile. There
are twenty-four brand new hours for me to live. I vow
to live them fully and learn to look at people with the
eyes of compassion.” You celebrate your twenty-four
brand new hours and you make the vow to look at
everyone with the eyes of compassion. It’s a very
beautiful way of living.
    Compassion is born from understanding. Once
you understand the situation of a person, you see
that he or she is a victim of that situation. And when
you realize that, you no longer condemn, judge, or
accuse. Compassion can be born in your heart. That
person does not need punishment. That person
needs help. Once you see that, you don’t suffer any-
more. You’re capable of doing exactly the opposite of
what your parents have done to you. That’s a wonder-
ful transformation.


                            Family, Parenting , and Relationships
Q. How can those of us who had a painful child-
hood get past our pain and learn to trust people
again?
A . Many of us have a wounded child within. When
we’ve been deeply wounded as children, it’s hard for
us to trust and love, and to allow love to penetrate
us. Because we are so busy, we don’t have time to
go back to our wounded child and be with her to
help with the healing. Many of us are afraid to go
back to ourselves and be with that child. The block of
pain and sorrow in us is so huge and overwhelming
that we run away from it. But in this practice, we are
advised to go home and take care of our wounded
child, even though this is difficult. We need instruc-
tions on how to do this so that we are not over-
whelmed by the pain inside. We practice cultivating
the energy of mindfulness to become strong enough.
With this energy, we can go home and embrace our
wounded child within. The practices of mindful
walking, mindful sitting, and mindful breathing are
crucial. Also, our friends’ energy of mindfulness can
help us. Maybe the first time we need one or two
friends—especially those who have been successful
in the practice—sitting next to us, to lend us their
support, mindfulness, and energy. When a friend


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
sits close to us and holds our hand, we combine her
energy with our own and we can go home to our-
selves to embrace our wounded child within.
    You have to talk to your wounded child several
times a day. Embracing your child tenderly, you reas-
sure him that you will never let him down again or
leave him unattended. If you have a loving Sangha,
your practice will be easier. To practice alone, with-
out the support of brothers and sisters, would be too
difficult for beginners. Your wounded child may rep-
resent several generations. Maybe your parents and
grandparents also had a wounded child within that
they did not know how to handle, so they transmit-
ted their wounded child to you. Our practice is to end
this vicious cycle.
    People suffer because they have not been touched
by compassion and understanding. If we generate the
energy of mindfulness, understanding, and compas-
sion for our wounded child, we will suffer much less.
Then we can allow people to love us. Before, we were
suspicious of everything and everyone. Compassion
helps us relate to others and restore communication.
Q. I’ve been caring for my elderly parents for several
years. I love them, but it’s a financial and physical


                             Family, Parenting , and Relationships
burden, and I’m finding it more and more difficult .
What can I do?
A . Caring for our parents comes not only from a sense
of responsibility and duty, but from a foundation of
love. When love and gratefulness are at the founda-
tion of our action, we don’t get tired, we don’t feel
despair. So the essential practice is to look deeply in
order to understand and to make love the founda-
tion of our action and our care, and we will not get
tired or discouraged. Serving our parents, taking
care of our parents is taking care of ourselves.
     There have to be moments when you and your
parents sit down and talk to each other so that there
can be mutual understanding and everyone will know
their limits. With that understanding and compas-
sion, your situation will become very different, much
more pleasant. When you take care of your newborn
baby, you don’t think that your newborn baby is
someone else; it’s you, yourself. So even if you have
to stay up late into the night, if you have to wake up
several times during the night, you don’t complain.
Because you have love, you have the insight that you
and your baby are one. If we can see and behave like
that, we have a lot more energy to continue.


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
Q. A loving relationship should be made up of two
equal partners. How can we ensure that the stron-
ger of the two does not overpower the weaker one
and swallow him or her?
A. As soon as the concept “one” appears, the con-
cept “two” also appears. It’s like right and left. Real-
ity should transcend the concepts of one and two. If
you put the teaching into practice, you will find the
answer on your own. The principle of the practice
is equanimity, using the wisdom of nondiscrimina-
tion.
     The right hand never tells the left that it is a good-
for-nothing. The right hand does not discriminate
against the left nor take pride in itself, because it
deeply knows that it is at one, or “non-two,” with the
left hand. Every time the left hand needs it, the right
hand comes and takes care of it without insisting
that it is the better, stronger hand. In a relationship,
it’s possible to have this wisdom of nondiscrimina-
tion. When we are capable of living with each other
like that, there is no stronger or weaker person, no
taking advantage of the other. If there is a tendency
to take advantage of the other, it means that the wis-
dom of nondiscrimination is not yet present.


                             Family, Parenting , and Relationships
Q. I’ve been practicing compassionate listening but
it is very difficult to listen to people who rant and
rave. How long is it necessary to practice compas-
sionate listening?
A . Many people feel the need to talk all the time. This
has become a habit for them. Although their friends
may have already heard what are saying, they keep
repeating the same things over and over again. The
true practice of deep listening is something that can
help people say the things they have never been able
to say. The most precious opportunity is to be heard
by someone who has the capacity for deep listening;
it can bring people great relief. But in this case such
deep listening is not helpful, because this person is
not saying anything new; he is repeating the same
thing. And that same thing is watering the negative
seeds in him and in us. So allowing this practice to
continue doesn’t help either person.
     We have to say, “Dear friend, I have already heard
what you are saying. There’s no use in repeating the
same thing over and over again. You know there are
blocks of suffering within you. But you haven’t had
the opportunity to recognize them, to look deeply
into them and find out the source that nourishes


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
those blocks of suffering; that is why you haven’t
been able to transform. That is why your suffering
continues to be expressed in a way that can make
you suffer and make the people around you suffer. So
the solution is not to talk about it, but to recognize
these blocks of suffering and to find out the causes,
the kinds of food that have brought them about in
you. Recognizing suffering and cutting off the source
of suffering is our practice. And I’d like to help you,
my dear, to do so. Because I have done the same
thing for myself, I’ve been able to free myself. I don’t
complain anymore, because I’ve been able to recog-
nize the blocks of suffering in myself. I’ve embraced
them and looked deeply into them. I’ve found their
foundation, their roots, and I’ve practiced in order
to stop nourishing them, so that I can transform. I
would like to help you to see you are doing the same
thing, and I will do everything in my power to help
you.” With loving speech, we can encourage our
friends to begin the practice, to embrace their suf-
fering, look deeply into the nature of the suffering,
and begin the work of transformation and healing.
Q. My mother-in-law is very critical. I try to be tol-
erant of her, but sometimes I get exasperated. What
will change this?


                            Family, Parenting , and Relationships
A . Your mother-in-law is the mother of your part-
ner; that is very important. Your partner is a part of
her and her lineage. You have made a commitment
to share your partner’s happiness and suffering, and
your mother-in-law is a part of that. Your mother-in-
law can be both a source of happiness and sorrow for
you and your partner. That is why your practice has
to embrace her; your partner’s happiness depends
very much on your in-laws’ happiness. If your part-
ner is not happy, it will be difficult for you to be
happy. Taking care of your in-laws is taking care of
yourself and your partner.
    You have to learn to take care of whatever belongs
to your partner because you care about her well-being
and happiness. That is why you have to look far and
wide and recognize everything and everyone that is
linked to her, so that you can really make her happy.
    We must be polite. When you go to your in-laws’
house, you greet them politely, because they are
your wife’s parents. Whether or not your mother-in-
law is loving, your behavior and capacity to respect,
embrace, and help her is related to your own and
your partner’s happiness. That is why, with looking
more deeply, the boundaries will be removed and you
will be able to accept her as an important ancestor of
your partner.


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
Q. My father and I had a difficult relationship. We
could not talk or listen to each other, and now he is
dead. Is it too late for us to find reconciliation?
A . Your father is still there, alive, in every cell of
your body. You are the continuation of your father.
He didn’t have the chance to encounter the Buddha-
dharma, the art of making peace inside and outside.
But he is lucky to have you to continue him, and the
transformation will not only be yours, but his. He
will profit from your practice.
    Your father can be with you in any moment.
When you practice breathing in, and you feel joy and
peace, you say, “Father, do you feel the joy and the
peace? We are practicing together.” When you walk,
you walk for your father as well. This is a practice of
love. He has the Buddha nature in him, the capacity
to be sweet and kind, but he did not have the chance
to develop that side of himself. You are going to help
him develop that aspect of his being.
    You can do this through the practice of deep lis-
tening, because your father in you needs to be lis-
tened to. And the little girl in you, she is still alive and
she wants to be listened to. You don’t need another
person in front of you in order to practice deep lis-
tening. You just sit there at the foot of a tree or on


                             Family, Parenting , and Relationships
the grass, and you listen to your father inside, and to
the little girl who was you. To listen to her is to listen
to yourself. Listening to your father is also listening
to yourself. The quality of the listening can be very
high, very deep, if we know how to be really present,
how to bring the mind back to the body and establish
ourselves fully in the here and the now. That deep lis-
tening will bring about a lot of insight, a lot of trans-
formation and healing. You can also write a letter to
your father: a concrete, deep, honest letter. That will
bring about true reconciliation within, because that
letter is not only for your father, it is also for you.
Q. Being single brings me a lot of pain. I know I am
fortunate to have a loving family and friends, but I
still wish I had a partner to share my life with. How
can I handle this ache when it comes?
A . We all share the fear that our need to love and
be loved cannot be fulfilled. The fear of being lonely
is always there, in everyone. We have to recognize
that fear and that need within ourselves. The prac-
tice is to look deeply into that kind of fear. To love is
to offer understanding and comfort. Understanding
is the source of love. We would feel miserable if no
one understood us. And when someone does not


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
understand us, he or she cannot love us. Without
understanding, love is impossible. So the truth is
that we need understanding and we need love. And
we are looking for someone who can provide us with
both.
    Suppose there is someone who is capable of offer-
ing us understanding and love. Suppose he is some-
where there, she is somewhere there. But we have to
ask the question: Are we capable of offering him or
her understanding and love? Are we capable of gen-
erating the understanding and the love that we so
need? Because if we’re not capable of generating the
energy of understanding, nothing will happen.
    The teaching of the Buddha aims at helping us
to generate the energy of love and understanding. If
we can produce that energy, it will first of all help us
to satisfy our need to be loved. And then, with that
capacity of love and understanding, we can embrace
the people who are with us now. We can make them
happy while we are happy ourselves. Happiness cre-
ates more nourishment, healing, and happiness.
    So the question is not: How can we obtain love
and understanding? The question is whether we have
the capacity of generating love and understanding
ourselves. If we do, we’ll feel wonderful, because
these energies satisfy us and the people around us at


                            Family, Parenting , and Relationships
the same time. That is the love of the Buddha. True
love is like that too. Loving one person is really an
opportunity to learn to love all people. If you have
the capacity to love and to understand, you can do
that now, you don’t have to wait. When we succeed
in this, our worry and fear go away, and we feel won-
derful right away.
Q. When a relationship ends, my feelings of sad-
ness, anger, and jealousy last for weeks and even
months. How can I turn the page on these painful
feelings?
A . The break in a relationship is a collective creation.
When two people don’t know how to treasure their
relationship, how to handle their feelings of anger
and frustration, how to practice loving speech and
deep listening, they may make a mess of their rela-
tionship. Feelings of fear, sorrow, regret, anger, and
despair are the outcome. There is a tendency to push
these feelings away, because thinking about the rela-
tionship allows those feelings to overwhelm us. That
is not mindfulness. Mindfulness is the practice of
mindful breathing in order to have enough energy
to recognize the feelings, embrace them, be one with
them, and not be overwhelmed by them. You’re much


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
more than your sorrow, anger, and despair. There’s
a buddha in you. You have the capacity to learn, to
understand, to be compassionate. The practice is to
call on these wholesome energies and to sit with our
sorrow and our sadness. The pain you’re experienc-
ing now may be your opportunity to learn how to
build a future. Your sorrow and anger will give you
a lot of wisdom. Have the courage to look deeply,
to accept these feelings and say, “Hello my pain, my
sadness, I know you are there, I want to take care of
you, I want to understand you, and I want to learn
together with you.” Even fifteen minutes of this can
bring some healing. Don’t be afraid. You have built
your own sadness; you can begin to build your own
joy.
Q. Why are our most challenging relationships with
the people with whom we are closest?
A . Because we are with them twenty-four hours
a day. It’s very clear that if we don’t have a happy,
harmonious relationship with our family and our
Sangha, helping others will be very difficult. The
practice offered by the Buddha is very precise and
very clear about how to make ourselves more pleas-
ant, more enjoyable to be with, and how to help


                               Family, Parenting , and Relationships
others to transform also. In fact, that is the basic
practice. In our community of monks and nuns we
practice the same way. We know that if we don’t have
happiness inside our community, if we don’t have
enough brotherhood and sisterhood to nourish us,
then going out to offer retreats and meditation prac-
tice will be artificial. So, the practice of transforming
ourselves and transforming our communities and
our families is the foundation of everything.
Q. How can I forgive people who have hurt me,
without condoning them or absolving them of
responsibility for their behavior?
A . Healing takes place when we are capable of gen-
erating the energy of compassion and understand-
ing. In the teaching of the Buddha, there is another
energy that can heal—that is the vow, the desire,
the determination to help. When we are victims
of aggressive action, if we look around we see that
there are other people who suffer like us, who have
also been victims of misdeeds. Suddenly our com-
passion arises, and we make the vow to do some-
thing, to protect the people who are about to become
victims, and to help those victims who have not
seen the way to transformation. If we can find that


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
desire, that willingness to help and heal, we become a
bodhisattva, we are inhabited by that strong energy
of the bodhisattva to go out and help.
    If we don’t do anything, others may become vic-
tims also. If you have the energy of a bodhisattva, if
you want very much to do something, if you want to
go out and protect children and others, that’s also a
very powerful energy that can heal the wound inside
us. With the energy of compassion and the energy of
the great vow, we can follow the path of Samantab-
hadra, the bodhisattva of great vows, to protect and
to heal others. Our compassion can embrace our fam-
ily and our society, and the healing can be absolute.
Q. Some of us have done terrible things in our past
and continue to suffer guilt over how we’ve harmed
others. Is it possible to move past this kind of
pain?
A . We have to find insight. Insight is at the founda-
tion of any kind of practice. The insight is that by
practicing, not only can we take care of the present,
we can also take care of and change the past and the
future.
    Suppose yesterday you produced a thought
that’s not worthy of you, a thought that doesn’t go


                             Family, Parenting , and Relationships
in the direction of understanding and compassion;
and today you regret that you have produced such a
thought. You know such a thought has had a bad effect
on your body, on your physical and mental health,
and on the health of the world. You regret that you
produced such a thought yesterday. So dwelling in
the present moment, you produce another thought,
a very different kind of thought, a thought that goes
in the direction of understanding and compassion. If
you know how to give rise to such a thought, it will
catch up with the thought of yesterday and neutral-
ize it. That is the law of karma. You can transform
the karma of the past by producing positive karma in
the present moment.
    I met a Vietnam War veteran who confessed that
his actions had caused the death of five children
in Vietnam. After the war he was not at peace. He
couldn’t tell anyone what he’d done. He couldn’t stand
to be around children. He lived with this anguish and
suffering for many years. Finally, he came to a retreat,
and feeling our love and trust he eventually felt safe
and told us what had happened.
    I said, “Okay, you have killed five children. But you
are still alive. Why do you shut yourself up in that
prison of regret? There are children who are dying in
this very moment because no one is trying to save


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
them. You can save one or two or three children right
now. If you’re able to do that, then you neutralize
what was in the past. You become a new person. You
may have killed five, but you can save fifty. Your life
becomes the life of a bodhisattva.”
    With that insight the man was transformed right
away. His life today is completely different. He made
a vow, a commitment, to use his life, his time and
energy to save children in the world. That moment
when consciousness is transformed is decisive. From
then on, everything will be transformed. That is why
you shouldn’t regret the past. There are things you
can do in the present moment that can neutralize
the past and assure a good future.
Q. How can we influence members of our family
who aren’t interested in spiritual practice or teach-
ings, but who spend a lot of time indoors watching
television and eating unhealthy food?
A . We can embody the insight and the practice.
When we try to impose our ideas on others, we get
a strong reaction. We shouldn’t preach or blame, we
should just use skillful means in order to help others
to realize that bringing toxins into their bodies and
minds will result in suffering. The fact that you are


                            Family, Parenting , and Relationships
practicing, taking good care of your body and your
mind, that you are healthy, smiling, pleasant, that is
like a live Dharma talk for them. Your own transfor-
mation, your own peace and joy will be an inspira-
tion for other people to follow. Don’t say, “I practice
and you don’t, that is why you suffer.” That will only
irritate them. Your own transformation and healing
is the most convincing element. Your smile will tell
them directly about your practice and what they are
missing.
Q. What is the best way to relieve my suffering and
the suffering of my friends and family?
A . We all know that understanding and compas-
sion can relieve suffering. This is not just a plati-
tude; where there is understanding and compassion,
there’s relief and help for ourselves and others. Our
practice is to keep that understanding and compas-
sion alive. As busy as we are, when we take time
to look a little bit deeper, we can always find more
understanding and compassion to offer. Time is very
precious; every minute, every hour counts. We don’t
want to throw time away. We want to make good use
of the minutes and the hours we have left. When
we focus our attention in the here and now and live


ANSWERS FROM THE HEART
simply, we have more time to do the things we think
are important. We don’t waste our energy in think-
ing, in worrying, in running after fame, power, and
wealth.
    Happiness is possible when you are capable of
doing the things and being the things that you want
to do and to be. When we walk for the sake of walk-
ing, when we sit for the sake of sitting, when we drink
tea for the sake of drinking tea, we don’t do it for
something or someone else. These things can be very
enjoyable. That is the practice of aimlessness. While
you do that, you heal yourself and you help heal the
world. Awakening means to see that truth—that you
want to know how to enjoy, how to live deeply, in a
very simple way. You don’t want to waste your time
anymore. Cherish the time that you are given.


THE SUN MY HEART
 From Mindfulness to Insight Contemplation
       Thich Nhat Hanh
                Parallax Press
             Berkeley, California


Parallax Press
P.O. Box 7355
Berkeley, California 94707
www.parallax.org
Parallax Press is the publishing division of Unified Buddhist Church, Inc.
Copyright 1988, by Unified Buddhist Church.
Printed in the United States of America.
All rights reserved.
Translated from the Vietnamese by Anh Huong Nguyen, Elin Sand,
and Annabel Laity.
Back cover photo by Karen Hagen Liste.
Cover design by Gay Reineck.
Edited by Arnie Kotler.
Thanks to Tyrone Cashman, Roger Jones, Brit Pyland, Sara Norwood,
and Tom Ginsberg.
       Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
        Nhat Hanh, Thich.
            The sun my heart.
            Translation of: Trai tim mat troi.
            Continuation of: The miracle of mindfulness.
            ISBN 0-938077-63-5
            1. Religious Life-Buddhism. I. Nhat Hanh, Thich. Phep
       la cua su tinh thfic. English. II. Title.
        BQ5395.N4713 1988 294.3'4448                           88-17908
       ISBN 0-938077-12-0
        15 16 17 18 19/08 07 06 05 04


                    Contents
              Introduction                      vii
Chapter One   Sunshine and Green Leaves          3
Chapter Two   The Dance of the Bees             35
Chapter Three The Universe in a Speck of Dust   61
Chapter Four  Cutting the Net of Birth & Death  83
Chapter Five  Look Deeply at Your Hand         115
              Notes                            135




                  Introduction
Meditators since the beginning of time have
known that they must use their own eyes and the
language of their own times to express their in-
sight. Wisdom is a living stream, not an icon to be
preserved in a museum. Only when a practitioner
finds the spring of wisdom in his or her own life
can it flow to future generations. Keeping the torch
of wisdom glowing is the work of all of us who
know how to clear a path through the forest in or-
der to walk on ahead.
   Our insight and our language are inseparable
from the times in which we live. For many years
now, the East has followed the West down the
path of technological and material development, to
the point of neglecting its own spiritual values. In
our world, technology is the main force behind
economics and politics, but those in the forefront of
science have begun to see something similar to
what the spiritual disciplines of the East discovered
long ago. If we can survive our times, the gap that
separates science and spirituality will close, and
East and West will meet one another on the path
to discover true mind. Those in whom the seeds of
this important endeavor have already been sown
                                                   vii


viii    THE SUN MY HEART
can start working towards that convergence right
now, using their own daily mindful lives.
     This small book was written not to show off any
knowledge of the author. (In fact, there is not
much for him to show off.) It prefers to be a friend
rather than a book. You can take it with you on the
bus or subway as you do your coat or your scarf. It
can give you small moments of joy at any time.
You may like to read a few lines, then close it and
put it back in your pocket, and read another few
lines sometime later. If you find a paragraph that is
difficult or complicated, just skip over it and try the
next one. You can return to it later and maybe you
will find that it is not so complicated after all.
Chapter Five, which is the last one, is quite pleas-
ant to read. You can start there if you like.
     Please draw on your own experience to under-
stand this book. Do not be intimidated by any of the
words or ideas. Only as author of the text yourself
will you find the joy and the strength necessary to
journey from mindfulness to insight.
                            Nhat Hanh
                            January 1988


THE SUN MY HEART



            CHAPTER               ONE
     Sunshine and Green Leaves
              Thanh Thuy's Apple Juice
Today three children, two girls and a little boy,
came from the village to play with Thanh Thuy
(pronounced "Tahn Tui"). The four of them ran
off to play on the hillside behind our house and
were gone for about an hour when they returned
to ask for something to drink. I took the last bottle
of homemade apple juice and gave them each a
full glass, serving Thuy last. Since her juice was
from the bottom of the bottle, it had some pulp in
it. When she noticed the particles, she pouted and
refused to drink it. So the four children went back
to their games on the hillside, and Thuy had not
drunk anything.
    Half an hour later, while I was meditating in my
room, I heard her calling. Thuy wanted to get her-
self a glass of cold water, but even on tiptoes she
couldn't reach the faucet. I reminded her of the
                                                    3


4    THE SUN MY HEART
glass of juice on the table and asked her to drink
that first. Turning to look at it, she saw that the
pulp had settled and the juice looked clear and de-
licious. She went to the table and took the glass
with both hands. After drinking half of it, she put
it down and asked, "Is this a different glass, Uncle
Monk?" (a common term for Vietnamese children
to use when addressing an older monk.)
    "No," I answered. "It's the same one as before. It
sat quietly for a bit, and now it's clear and deli-
cious." Thuy looked at the glass again. "It really is
good. Was it meditating like you, Uncle Monk?" I
laughed and patted her head. "Let's say that I imi-
tate the apple juice when I sit; that is closer to the
truth."
Every night at Thuy's bedtime, I sit in meditation. I
let her sleep in the same room, near where I am
sitting. We have agreed that while I am sitting, she
will go to bed without talking. In that peaceful at-
mosphere, rest comes easily to her, and she is usu-
ally asleep within 5 or 10 minutes. When I finish
sitting, I cover her with a blanket.
   Thanh Thuy is the child of "boat people." She is
not yet 4 1/2 years old. She crossed the seas with her
father and arrived in Malaysia in April of last year.
Her mother stayed in Vietnam. When her father
arrived here in France, he left Thuy with us for
several months while he went to Paris to look for a
job. I taught her the Vietnamese alphabet and
some popular folk songs from our country. She is


                             SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 5
very intelligent, and after two weeks she was able
to spell out and slowly read The Kingdom of Fools, by
Leo Tolstoy, which I translated into Vietnamese
from the French.
   Every night Thanh Thuy sees me sit. I told her
that I am "sitting in meditation" without explain-
ing what it means or why I do it. Every night when
she sees me wash my face, put on my robes, and
light a stick of incense to make the room fragrant,
she knows that soon I will begin "meditating." She
also knows that it is time for her to brush her teeth,
change into pajamas, and go quietly to bed. I have
never had to remind her.
   Without a doubt, Thuy thought that the apple
juice was sitting for a while to clear itself, just like
her Uncle Monk. "Was it meditating like you?" I
think that Thanh Thuy, not yet 4 1/ 2, understands
the meaning of meditation without any explana-
tion. The apple juice became clear after resting
awhile. In the same way, if we rest in meditation
awhile, we too become clear. This clarity refreshes
us and gives us strength and serenity. As we feel
ourselves refreshed, our surroundings also become
refreshed. Children like to be near us, not just to
get candy and hear stories. They like to be near us
because they can feel this "freshness."
Tonight a guest has come. I fill a glass with the last
of the apple juice and put it on the table in the
middle of the meditation room. Thuy is already
fast asleep, and I invite my friend to sit very qui-
etly, just like the apple juice.


6    THE SUN MY HEART
                   A River of Perceptions
We sit for about 40 minutes. I notice my friend
smiling as he looks at the juice. It has become very
clear. "And you, my friend, are you? Even if you
have not settled as thoroughly as the apple juice,
don't you feel a little less agitated, less fidgety, less
disturbed? The smile on your lips hasn't faded yet,
but I think you doubt that you might become as
clear as the apple juice, even if we continue to sit
for hours.
   "The glass of juice has a very stable base. But
you, your sitting is not so sure. Those tiny bits of
pulp only have to follow the laws of nature to fall
gently to the bottom of the glass. But your thoughts
obey no such law. To the contrary, they buzz
feverishly, like a swarm of bees, and so you think
you cannot settle like the apple juice.
   fly ou tell me that people, living beings with the
capacity to think and to feel, cannot be compared
with a glass of juice. I agree, but I also know that we
can do what the apple juice does, and more. We
can be at peace, not only while sitting, but also
while walking and working.
   "Perhaps you don't believe me, because 40 min-
utes have passed and you tried so hard but weren't
able to achieve the peace you hoped for. Thuy is
sleeping peacefully, her breathing is light. Why
don't we light another candle before continuing
our conversation?"


                            SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 7
   "Little Thuy sleeps this way effortlessly. You
know those nights when sleep eludes you, and the
harder you try to sleep the less you can. You are
trying to force yourself to be peaceful, and you feel
the resistance inside of you. This same sort of
resistance is felt by many people during their first
experiences with meditation. The more they try to
calm themselves, the more restless they become.
The Vietnamese think this is because they are vic-
tims of demons or bad karma, but really this resis-
tance is born out of our very efforts to be peaceful.
The effort itself becomes oppressive. Our thoughts
and feelings flow like a river. If we try to stop the
flow of a river, we will meet the resistance of the
water. It is better to flow with it, and then we may
be able to guide it in ways we want it to go. We
must not attempt to halt it.
   "Keep in mind that the river must flow and that
we are going to follow it. We must be aware of ev-
ery little stream that joins it. We must be aware of
all the thoughts, feelings, and sensations that arise
in us-of their birth, duration, and disappearance.
Do you see? Now the resistance begins to disap-
pear. The river of perceptions is still flowing, but
no longer in darkness. It is now flowing in the
sunlight of awareness. To keep this sun always
shining inside of us, illuminating each rivulet,
each pebble, each bend in the river, is the practice
of meditation. To practice meditation is, first of all,
to observe and to follow these details.
   "At the moment of awareness we feel we are in
control, even though the river is still there, still


8   THE SUN MY HEART
flowing. We feel ourselves at peace, but this isn't
the 'peace' of the apple juice. Being at peace doesn't
mean our thoughts and feelings are frozen. Being
at peace is not the same as being anesthetized. A
peaceful mind does not mean a mind empty of
thoughts, sensations, and emotions. A peaceful
mind is not an absent one. It is clear that thoughts
and feelings alone do not comprise the whole of
our being. Fury, hatred, shame, faith, doubt, impa-
tience, disgust, desire, sorrow, and anguish are also
mind. Hope, inhibition, intuition, instinct,
subconscious and unconscious minds are equally
part of the self. Vijiianavada Buddhism discusses
at length the eight principal and 51 subordinate
mental conditions. If you have the time, you may
want to look at these writings. They embrace all
psychological phenomena."
               Sunshine and Green Leaves
Beginning meditators usually think they must
suppress all thoughts and feelings (often called
"false mind") in order to create conditions favor-
able to concentration and understanding (called
"true mind"). They use methods such as focusing
their attention on an object or counting their
breaths to try to block out thoughts and feelings.
Concentrating on an object and counting the breath
are excellent methods, but they should not be used
for suppression or repression. We know that as


                            SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES   9
soon as there is repression, there is rebellion-re-
pression entails rebellion. True mind and false
mind are one. Denying one is denying the other.
Suppressing one is suppressing the other. Our
mind is our self. We cannot suppress it. We must
treat it with respect, with gentleness, and absolutely
without violence. Since we do not even know
what our "self" is, how can we know if it is true or
false, and whether or what to suppress? The only
thing we can do is to let the sunlight of awareness
shine on our "self" and en-lighten it, so we can
look at it directly.
   Just as flowers and leaves are only part of a
plant, and just as waves are only part of the ocean,
perceptions, feelings, and thoughts are only part of
the self. Blossoms and leaves are a natural mani-
festation of plants, and waves are a natural expres-
sion of oceans. It is useless to try to repress or stifle
them. It is impossible. We can only observe them.
Because they exist, we can find their source, which
is exactly the same as our own.
   The sun of awareness originates in the heart of
the self. It enables the self to illuminate the self. It
lights not only all thoughts and feelings present. It
lights itself as well.
Let us return to the apple juice, quietly "resting."
The river of our perceptions continues to flow, but
now, in the sunlight of awareness, it flows peace-
fully, and we are serene. The relation between the
river of perceptions and the sun of awareness is
not the same as that of an actual river and the ac-


10   THE SUN MY HEART
tual sun. Whether it is midnight or noon, whether
the sun is absent or its penetrating rays are beam-
ing down, the waters of the Mississippi River con-
tinue to flow, more or less the same. But when the
sun of awareness shines on the river of our per-
ceptions, the mind is transformed. Both river and
sun are of the same nature.
   Let us consider the relationship between the
color of leaves and sunlight, which also have the
same nature. At midnight, the starlight and
moonlight reveal only the form of the trees and
leaves. But if the sun were suddenly to shine, the
green color of the leaves would immediately ap-
pear. The tender green of the leaves in April exists
because the sunlight exists. One day, while sitting
in a forest, mimicking the Prajfia Paramita Heart
Sutra, I wrote:
         Sunshine is green leaves
         Green leaves are sunshine
         Sunshine is not different from green leaves
         Green leaves are not different from sun-
           shine
         The same is true of all forms and colors. 1
   As soon as the sun of awareness shines, at that
very moment a great change takes place. Medita-
tion lets the sun of awareness rise easily, so we can
see more clearly. When we meditate, we seem to
have two selves. One is the flowing river of
thoughts and feelings, and the other is the sun of


                             SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 11
awareness that shines on them. Which is our own
self? Which is true? Which false? Which is good?
Which bad? Please calm down, my friend. Lay
down your sharp sword of conceptual thinking.
Don't be in such a hurry to cut your "self" in two.
Both are self. Neither is true. Neither is false. They
are both true and both false.
   We know that light and color are not separate
phenomena. In the same way, the sun of self and
the river of self are not different. Sit with me, let a
smile form on your lips, let your sun shine, close
your eyes, if need be, to see your self more clearly.
Your sun of awareness is only part of your river of
self, isn't it? It follows the same laws as all psycho-
logical phenomena: it arises and vanishes away. To
examine something with a microscope, a scientist
must shine light on the object being observed. To
observe the self, you must shine light on it too, the
light of awareness.
   I just told you to put down your sword of con-
ceptualization and not cut your self into sections.
Actually, you couldn't, even if you wanted to. Do
you think you can separate the sunshine from the
green color of the leaves? You can no more sepa-
rate the observing self from the self observed.
When the sun of awareness shines, the nature of
thoughts and feelings is transformed. It is one with
the observing mind, but they remain different, like
the green of the leaves and the sunshine. Don't
rush from the concept of "two" to the concept of
"one." This ever-present sun of awareness is at the
same time its own object. When a lamp is turned


12   THE SUN MY HEART
on, the lamp itself is also brought to light. "I know
that I know." "I am conscious of being conscious."
When you think, "The sun of awareness has gone
out in me," at that moment it re-lights itself, faster
than the speed of light.
                 Darkness Becomes Light
Observe the changes that take place in your mind
under the light of awareness. Even your breathing
has changed and become "not-two" (I don't want to
say "one") with your observing self. This is also
true of your thoughts and feelings, which, together
with their effects, are suddenly transformed. When
you do not try to judge or suppress them, they be-
come intertwined with the observing mind.
   From time to time you may become restless, and
the restlessness will not go away. At such times,
just sit quietly, follow your breathing, smile a half-
smile, and shine your awareness on the restless-
ness. Don't judge it or try to destroy it, because this
restlessness is you yourself. It is born, has some
period of existence, and fades away, quite naturally.
Don't be in too big a hurry to find its source. Don't
try too hard to make it disappear. Just illuminate it.
You will see that little by little it will change,
merging, becoming connected, with you, the ob-
server. Any psychological state which you subject
to this illumination will eventually soften and ac-
quire the same nature as the observing mind.


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 13
    Throughout your meditation, keep the sun of
your awareness shining. Like the physical sun,
which lights every leaf and every blade of grass,
our awareness lights our every thought and feel-
ing, allowing us to recognize them, be aware of
their birth, duration, and dissolution, without
judging or evaluating, welcoming or banishing
them. It is important that you do not consider
awareness to be your "ally," called on to suppress
the "enemies" that are your unruly thoughts. Do
not turn your mind into a battlefield. Do not have
a war there; for all your feelings-joy, sorrow, an-
ger, hatred-are part of yourself. Awareness is like
an elder brother or sister, gentle and attentive, who
is there to guide and enlighten. It is a tolerant and
lucid presence, never violent or discriminating. It
is there to recognize and identify thoughts and
feelings, not to judge them as good or bad, or place
them into opposing camps in order to fight with
each other. Opposition between good and bad is of-
ten compared to light and dark, but if we look at it
in a different way, we will see that when light
shines, darkness does not disappear. It doesn't
leave; it merges with the light. It becomes the light.
    A while ago I invited my guest to smile. To
meditate does not mean to fight with a problem.
To meditate means to observe. Your smile proves
it. It proves that you are being gentle with yourself,
that the sun of awareness is shining in you, that
you have control of your situation. You are your-
self, and you have acquired some peace. It is this
peace that makes a child love to be near you.


14    THE SUN MY HEART
            A Poem for Buttoning Your Jacket
We can be better than a glass of apple juice. Not
only can we settle peacefully while sitting still, we
can also do it while standing, lying down, walking,
or even working. What prevents you from allow-
ing the sun of awareness to shine while you take a
walk, make a cup of tea or coffee, or wash your
clothes? When I first became a student at the Tu
Hieu Monastery, I learned to maintain awareness
during all activities-weeding the garden, raking
leaves around the pond, washing dishes in the
kitchen. I practiced mindfulness in the way taught
by Zen Master Doc The in his little manual, Essen-
tials of the Practice to Apply Each Day. According to
this small book, we must be fully aware of all our
actions. While waking up we know that we are
waking up; while buttoning our jacket, we know
that we are buttoning our jacket; while washing
our hands we know that we are washing our
hands. Master Doc The composed short poems for
us to recite while washing our hands or buttoning
our jackets to help us remain firmly rooted in
awareness. Here is the poem he wrote for us to re-
cite while buttoning our jacket:
         While buttoning my jacket
         I hope that all beings
         Will keep their hearts warm
         And not lose themselves.


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 15
   With the aid of verses like this, it is easy for the
the sun of awareness to shine its light on our
physical actions as well as our thoughts and feel-
ings. When I was a child I often heard my mother
tell my elder sister that a girl must pay attention to
her every movement. I was glad I was a boy who
didn't have to pay attention like that. It was only
when I began to practice meditation that I realized
that I had to pay a thousand times more attention
to my movements than my sister had. And not
only to my movements, but also to my thoughts
and feelings! My mother, like all mothers, knew
that a girl who pays attention to her movements
becomes more beautiful. Her movements are not
jerky, rushed, or clumsy; they become gentle, calm,
and graceful. Without knowing it, my mother
taught my sister meditation.
   In the same way, someone who practices aware-
ness becomes beautiful to see. A Zen master, ob-
serving a student ringing the bell, sweeping the
yard, setting the table, can guess how ripe that stu-
dent is, can measure the student's "level of medi-
tation" in his or her manners and personality. This
"level" is the fruit of the practice of awareness, and
the master calls it "the flavor of Zen."
              Three Hours for a Cup of Tea
The secret of meditation is to be conscious of each
second of your existence and to keep the sun of
awareness continually shining-in both the physi-


16    THE SUN MY HEART
cal and psychological realms, in all circumstances,
on each thing that arises. While drinking a cup of
tea, our mind must be fully present in the act of
drinking the tea. Drinking tea or coffee can be one
of our daily pleasures if we partake of it fully. How
much time do you set aside for one cup of tea? In
coffee shops in New York or Tokyo, people come
in, order their coffee, drink it quickly, pay, and rush
out to do something else. This takes a few minutes
at most. Often there is loud music playing, and
your ears hear the music, your eyes watch others
gulping down their coffee, and your mind is
thinking of what to do next. You can't really call
this drinking coffee.
    Have you ever participated in a tea ceremony? It
may take two or three hours just being together
and drinking one or two cups of tea. The time is
not spent talking-only being together and drink-
ing tea. Perhaps you think this is irresponsible be-
cause the participants are not worrying about the
world situation, but you must admit that people
who spend their time this way know how to drink
tea, know the pleasure of having tea with a friend.
    Devoting two hours to a cup of tea is, I agree, a
little extreme. There are many other things to do:
gardening, laundry, washing dishes, binding books,
writing. Perhaps these other tasks are less pleasant
than drinking tea or walking in the hills, but if we
do them in full awareness, we will find them quite
agreeable. Even washing the dishes after a big meal
can be a joy.


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 17
              Bathing a Newborn Buddha
To my mind, the idea that doing dishes is un-
pleasant can occur only when you aren't doing
them. Once you are standing in front of the sink
with your sleeves rolled up and your hands in
warm water, it really isn't so bad. I enjoy taking my
time with each dish, being fully aware of the dish,
the water, and each movement of my hands. I
know that if I hurry in order to go and have a cup
of tea, the time will be unpleasant, and not worth
living. That would be a pity, for each minute, each
second of life is a miracle. The dishes themselves
and the fact that I am here washing them are
miracles! I wrote about this in The Miracle of Mind-
fulness. Each bowl I wash, each poem I compose,
each time I invite a bell to sound is a miracle, and
each has exactly the same value. One day, while
washing a bowl, I felt that my movements were as
sacred and respectful as bathing a newborn Bud-
dha. If he were to read this, that newborn Buddha
would certainly be happy for me, and not at all in-
sulted at being compared with a bowl.
   Each thought, each action in the sunlight of
awareness becomes sacred. In this light, no bound-
ary exists between the sacred and the profane. I
must confess it takes me a bit longer to do the
dishes, but I live fully in every moment, and I am
happy. Washing the dishes is at the same time a
means and an end-that is, not only do we do the
dishes in order to have clean dishes, we also do the


18    THE SUN MY HEART
dishes just to do the dishes, to live fully in each
moment while washing them.
   If I am incapable of washing dishes joyfully, if I
want to finish them quickly so I can go and have a
cup of tea, I will be equally incapable of drinking
the tea joyfully. With the cup in my hands I will be
thinking about what to do next, and the fragrance
and the flavor of the tea, together with the pleasure
of drinking it, will be lost. I will always be dragged
into the future, never able to live in the present
moment.
          Nourishing Awareness While Working
Our work, which lets us "earn our daily bread," can
be done in the same way as the dishes. In my
community, I bind books. Using a toothbrush, a
small wheel, and a very heavy fire-proof brick
(about 4 or 5 pounds), I can bind 200 books in a day.
Before binding, I gather all the pages and arrange
them numerically around a long table. Then I walk
around the table, and when I have walked all
around it, I know that I have the correct number of
pages for one signature. Walking around the table,
I know that I am not going anywhere in particular,
so I walk slowly, gathering each page, conscious of
each movement, breathing softly, conscious of
each breath. I am at peace while assembling the
pages, gluing them, and putting the cover on the
book. I know I cannot produce as many books in a


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 19
day as a professional bookbinder or a machine, but
I also know that I do not hate my job. If you want a
lot of money to spend, you must work hard and
quickly, but if you live simply, you can work gently
and in full awareness. I know many young people
who prefer to work less, perhaps four hours a day,
earning a small livelihood, so they can live simply
and happily. This may be a solution to our society's
problems-reducing the production of useless
goods, sharing work with those who have none,
and living simply and happily. Some individuals
and communities have already proved that it is
possible. This is a promising sign for the future,
isn't it?
   You may ask how you can nourish awareness
while washing dishes, binding books, or working
in a factory or an office. I think you have to find
your own answer. Do whatever you can to keep the
light of awareness shining inside yourself. You will
discover ways that suit you, or you can try some
techniques that others have tried-like reciting the
short poems of Zen master Doc The, or concen-
trating on your breathing. You can maintain
awareness of each inhalation and exhalation, of
each movement of your lungs. When a thought or
feeling arises, allow it to flow naturally with your
breath. It may help to breathe lightly and a little
more slowly than usual as a reminder that you are
following your breathing.


20   THE SUN MY HEART
                   The Precious Smile
While following your breathing, you have been
able to stay fully conscious for some time. You
have succeeded a bit, haven't you? So why not
smile? A tiny bud of a smile, just to prove you
have succeeded. Seeing you smile, I know imme-
diately that you are dwelling in awareness. Keep
this smile always blooming, the half-smile of a
Buddha.
   This tiny budding smile, how many artists have
labored to bring it to the lips of countless statues of
the Buddha? Perhaps you have seen them on the
faces at Angkor Wat in Kampuchea, or those from
Gandhara in northwest India. I am sure the same
smile must have been on the faces of the sculptors
as they worked. Can you imagine an angry sculptor
giving birth to such a smile? Surely not! I know
the sculptor who created the "Parinirvana" statue
on Tra Cu Mountain in Vietnam. During the six
months it took him to create that statue, he re-
mained vegetarian, practicing sitting meditation
and studying sutras. Mona Lisa's smile is light, just
a hint of a smile. Yet even a smile like that is
enough to relax all the muscles on your face, to
banish all worries and fatigue. A tiny bud of a
smile on your lips nourishes awareness and calms
you miraculously. It returns you to the peace you
had lost.
   When you walk in the hills, or in a park, or
along a river bank, you can follow your breath,


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 21
with a half-smile blooming on your lips. When
you feel tired or irritated, you can lie down with
your arms at your sides, allowing all your muscles
to relax, maintaining awareness of just your breath
and your smile. Relaxing in this way is wonderful,
and quite refreshing. You will benefit a lot if you
practice it several times a day. Your mindful breath
and your smile will bring happiness to you and to
those around you. Even if you spend a lot of
money on gifts for everyone in your family, noth-
ing you could buy them can give as much true
happiness as your gift of awareness, breathing, and
smiling, and these precious gifts cost nothing.
                Breathing Rhythmically
When you are too restless or under too much
strain to follow your breathing, you can count your
breath instead. Count "one" during the first inha-
lation and exhalation. Do not lose the thought
"one." During the next inhalation and exhalation,
count "two," and do not lose it. Continue in this
way until you reach "ten," and then start again
with "one." If you lose the thread of concentration
at any time, you can start again at "one." When
you are calm and concentrated, you will be able to
follow your breath without counting.
   Have you ever cut grass with a scythe? Five or
six years ago, I brought a scythe home and tried to
cut the grass around my cottage with it. It took
more than a week before I found the best way to


22   THE SUN MY HEART
use it. The way you stand, the way you hold the
scythe, the angle of the blade on the grass are all
important. I found that if I coordinated the move-
ment of my arms with the rhythm of my breath-
ing, and worked unhurriedly, while maintaining
awareness of my activity, I was able to work for a
longer period of time. When I didn't do this, I be-
came tired in just ten minutes. One day a French-
man of Italian descent was visiting my neighbor,
and I asked him to show me how to use a scythe.
He was much more adept than I, but for the most
part he used the same position and movements.
What surprised me was that he too coordinated his
movements with his breathing. Since then, when-
ever I see a neighbor cutting his grass with a scythe,
I know they are practicing awareness.
   Even before having a scythe, I used other tools-
picks, shovels, rakes-coordinating my breath and
my movement. I have found that except for very
heavy labor, such as moving boulders or pushing
full wheelbarrows (which make full awareness dif-
ficult), most jobs-turning the soil, making fur-
rows, sowing seeds, spreading manure, watering-
can be done in a relaxed and mindful way. During
the past few years I have avoided tiring myself and
losing my breath. I think it is better not to mistreat
my body. I must take care of it, treat it with respect
as a musician does his instrument. I apply
"nonviolence" to my body, for it is not merely a
means to practice the Way, it itself is the Way. It is
not only the temple, it is also the sage. My garden-


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 23
ing and bookbinding tools, I like and respect them
very much. I use them while following my
breathing, and I feel that these tools and I breathe
together in rhythm.
             A Poem and a Peppermint Plant
I don't know what job you do every day, but I do
know that some tasks lend themselves to aware-
ness more easily than others. Writing, for example,
is difficult to do mindfully. I have now reached the
point when I know that a sentence is finished. But
while writing the sentence, even now, I sometimes
forget. That is why I have been doing more manual
work and less writing these past few years. Some-
one said to me, "Planting tomatoes and lettuce may
be the gateway to everything, but not everyone can
write books and stories and poems as well as you
do. Please don't waste your time with manual
work!" I have not wasted any of my time. Planting
a seed, washing a dish, cutting the grass are as eter-
nal, as beautiful, as writing a poem! I do not
understand how a poem can be better than a pep-
permint plant. Planting seeds gives me as much
pleasure as writing a poem. For me, a head of let-
tuce or a peppermint plant has as much ev-
erlasting effect in time and space as a poem.
   When I helped found the University of Ad-
vanced Buddhist Studies in 1964, I made a grave
error. The students, who included young monks
and nuns, studied only books, scriptures, and ideas.


24   THE SUN MY HEART
At the end they had gathered nothing more than a
handful of knowledge and their diplomas. In the
past, when novices were accepted into a
monastery, they would be taken immediately into
the garden to learn weeding, watering, and
planting in full awareness. The first book they read
was the collection of gathas by Master Doc The, the
book which included the poems for buttoning your
jacket, washing your hands, crossing a stream,
carrying water, finding your slippers in the
morning, practical things, so they could practice
awareness all day long. Only later would they begin
to study sutras and participate in group discussions
and private interviews with the master, and even
then the scholarly studies would always go hand in
hand with the practical ones. If I were to help
found another university, I would model it on the
old monasteries. It would be a community where
all the students would eat, sleep, work, and live
everyday life in the sunlight of awareness, perhaps
like the Ark Community in France or the Shanti
Niketan or Phuong Boi communities. I am sure
that in all the world's religions, meditation and
study centers resemble one another. These are
good models for universities as well.
           Establishing a Spiritual Homeland
Each of us needs to "belong to" a place, such as a
retreat center or a monastery, where each feature of


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 25
the landscape, the sounds of the bell, and even the
buildings are designed to remind us to return to
awareness. It is helpful to go there from time to
time for several days or several weeks to renew
ourselves. Even when we cannot actually go there,
we only need to think of it, and we can feel our-
selves smile and become peaceful and happy.
   The people who live there should emanate
peace and freshness, the fruits of living in aware-
ness. They must always be there to care for us, con-
sole and support us, help us heal our wounds. Each
of us must find a spiritual homeland where we can
retreat from time to time, much as we ran to our
mothers for refuge when we were young.
   In the late 1950's, several of us built the Fragrant
Palm Hermitage (Phuong Boi) in the Dalat Forest
in central Vietnam. It was our spiritual homeland.
Later when some of us left to form La Boi Press,
the School of Youth for Social Service, Van Hanh
University, and Thuong Chieu Monastery, we
were able to recall Phuong Boi, and make each of
these new institutions in its own way a spiritual
homeland. Many of you are involved in working
for social change and have a great need for such a
healing place. When we were prevented by the war
from returning to Phuong Boi, we went to Thuong
Chieu Monastery, and when Thuong Chieu be-
came inaccessible, we prepared for the birth of
Plum Village in France.


26   THE SUN MY HEART
                 Singing, Really Singing
We lead extremely busy lives. Even though we do
not have to do as much manual labor as people in
former times, we never seem to have enough time
for ourselves. I know people who say they do not
even have enough time to eat or breathe, and it
appears to me to be true! What can we do about
this? Can we take hold of time with both hands
and slow it down?
   First, let us light the torch of our awareness and
learn again how to drink tea, eat, wash dishes,
walk, sit, drive, and work in awareness. We do not
have to be swept along by circumstances. We are
not just a leaf or a log in a rushing river. With
awareness, each of our daily acts takes on a new
meaning, and we discover that we are more than
machines, that our activities are not just mindless
repetitions. We find that life is a miracle, the uni-
verse is a miracle, and we too are a miracle.
   When we are invaded by confusion and disper-
sion, we can ask ourselves, "What exactly am I do-
ing right now? Am I wasting my life?" These
questions immediately relight our awareness and
return our attention to our breathing. A small
smile naturally appears on our lips, and each sec-
ond of our work becomes alive. If you want to sing,
please sing! Really sing!


                           SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 27
                From Sleep to Awakening
A political science professor asked me what I think
about when I meditate. I told him, "I don't think
about anything." I said that I am only attentive to
what is there, what is going on. He appeared skep-
tical, but it is the truth. While sitting, I make al-
most no use of my intellect. I don't try to analyze
things or solve complex problems, like math prob-
lems or riddles. Even if I am examining a kung-an
(Japanese: koan), I just allow it to be there and I
contemplate it, without seeking to explain or in-
terpret it, because I know that a kung-an is not a
puzzle to solve. Examination, in the sense of
awareness, does not mean analysis. It only means
continuous recognition. Thinking requires
strenuous mental work, and makes us tired. This is
not the case while resting in awareness or "recog-
nizing." We have a tendency to think that medita-
tion demands a great mobilization of "gray mat-
ter," but that is really not the case. A meditator is
not a thinker; a meditator does not do mental la-
bor. On the contrary, meditation rests the mind.
   Since our conversation began, I haven't once
asked my friend to use his "gray matter." I have
only invited him to "see," to "recognize" things
with me. To do that, we must concentrate, but not
analyze. We must be attentive, without specula-
tion or interpretation. Being attentive means giv-
ing only bare attention. It is a vehicle which can
take you from sleep to awakening. If you do not
know you are angry, feeling, thinking, sitting, and


28   THE SUN MY HEART
so forth, you are asleep. In his novel The Stranger,
Albert Camus describes his anti-hero as a man who
"lives as though dead." This is like living in a dark
room with no light of awareness. When you light
the lamp of awareness, you pass from sleep to
awakening. The verb buddh in Sanskrit means "to
wake up," and one who wakes up is called a Bud-
dha. A Buddha is a person who is always awake.
From time to time we have this awareness, so we
are "from-time-to-time" Buddhas.
        Awareness, Concentration, Understanding
Awareness (sati in Pali, smrti in Sanskrit) simply
means "being conscious of," "remembering," or
"becoming acquainted with." But we must use it in
the sense of "being in the process of being con-
scious of," or "being in the process of remember-
ing." We have learned the word awareness in the
sense of recognition, or bare attention, but the
meaning doesn't stop there. In awareness, there are
also the elements concentration (samadhi) and un-
derstanding (prajiia). Concentration and under-
standing together are both the intensity of aware-
ness and the fruit of awareness. Every time the
lamp of awareness is lit, concentration (one-point-
edness) and understanding (clear-seeing) are natu-
rally present. The words concentration and under-
standing are often used as terms of consequence or
effect. In terms of antecedent or cause, we may use


                          SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 29
the words "stopping" and "looking." If we can stop
and look attentively, we succeed in seeing clearly.
But what has to stop? Forgetfulness, dispersion,
and confusion-the state of lost awareness, the ab-
sence of consciousness must stop. Stopping does
not mean suppression. There is only the transfor-
mation of forgetfulness into remembrance, the ab-
sence of awareness into the presence of awareness. 2
                Cooking a Pot of Corn
The practice of meditation is not an exercise in
analysis or reasoning. The sword of logic has no
place in the practices of awareness, concentration,
and understanding, and those of stopping and
looking. In Vietnam, when we cook a pot of dried
corn, we concentrate the fire under the pot and
several hours later the kernels come loose and split
open. When the sun's rays beat down on the snow,
the snow slowly melts. When a hen sits on her
eggs, the chicks inside gradually take form until
they are ready to peck their way out. These are
images which illustrate the effect of practicing
meditation.
   The aim of this practice is to see the true face of
reality, which is mind and mind-object. When we
speak of mind and of the outside world, we imme-
diately are caught in a dualistic conception of the
universe. If we use the words mind and mind-ob-
ject, we can avoid the damage done by the sword of
conceptualized discrimination. The effect of medi-


30   THE SUN MY HEART
tation is like the fire under the pot, the sun's rays
on the snow, and the hen's warmth on her eggs. In
these three cases, there is no attempt at reasoning
or analysis, just patient and continuous concentra-
tion. We can allow the truth to appear, but we can-
not describe it using math, geometry, philosophy,
or any other image of our intellect.
                 Examining a Kung-an
"Truth cannot be captured by concepts." I wonder
who said this first. We too have this perception
when we concentrate ourselves in order to ob-
serve. The sword of conceptual thinking only cuts
truth into small, lifeless pieces all seemingly inde-
pendent of each other. Many scientists acknowl-
edge that great discoveries are often realized
through intuition. For them, reason is not an agent
of discovery but a tool to explain and support It af-
terwards. These discoveries often occur at the most
unexpected times, times when the scientist is not
actively engaged in thinking, analyzing, or rea-
soning. An illuminating perception comes about
because the scientist has been paying continual
silent attention to the problem-while eating,
walking, talking, even sleeping, every moment of
the day. People working with kung-ans do so in
exactly the same way. We speak of "meditating on"
a kung-an, but a more precise description would be
"examining" or "looking at" it. All the problems of


                            SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 31
life, all feelings such as passion, hatred, sadness,
and suffering, as well as thoughts such as birth,
death, form, emptiness, existence, and non-exis-
tence can be used equally well as "objects of
examination."
            Awareness is Both Cause and Effect
Awareness is at the same time cause and effect,
concentration and understanding, stopping and
looking. As soon as the light of awareness is lit, we
concentrate, we are peaceful, we see ourselves
more clearly. When a generator is running, the
current flows and the bulb lights. When it keeps
running while charging a battery, energy accumu-
lates in the battery. In the same way, when aware-
ness is maintained continuously, concentration
and understanding accumulate. This is what we
call "working intensively." Even in sleep, aware-
ness does not cease and the kung-an continues to
be examined, even without the knowledge of the
sleeper. Sometimes we even continue in aware-
ness while dreaming. When I practice intensively,
I can see even in my dreams that I maintain
awareness.
               Conceiving the Inconceivable
The scientific method involves limiting as much
as possible the field of observation in order to see


32    THE SUN MY HEART
clearly. The smaller the field, the greater the atten-
tion. However, at the level of subatomic particles,
scientists have discovered that each particle is af-
fected by all other particles, and even by the mind
of the observing scientist. A school of theoretical
physicists has developed the "bootstrap" concept,
which suggests that every thing and every being in
the universe depend on every other thing and ev-
ery other being for their existence. We are used to
believing that particles form "things," but in fact all
particles are dependent upon all other particles and
none have a separate individuality-"every parti-
cle is made up of all the others." This concept is
quite similar to that expressed in the Avatamsaka
Sutra, "All is one."3
   If reality is an interaction, an "interbeing," how
can we penetrate its essence? The T sao - tun g
(Japanese: Soto) Zen sect teaches its practitioners
just to observe, without judgment, without specu-
lation. They say, "How can one conceive the in-
conceivable? Not thinking, that is the essence of
Zen."4 I like the Vietnamese words quan chieu be-
cause they include the idea of shining light on
something in order to look at it-a looking free of
all speculation, reasoning, interpretation, or eval-
uation. When the sun shines continuously on a
lotus flower, it opens widely, revealing its seed-
heart. In the same way, through the activity of
looking, reality gently reveals itself. In meditation,
the subject and object of pure observation are in-
separable.


                          SUNSHINE AND GREEN LEAVES 33
             A Grain of Salt Enters the Sea
In science before the twentieth century, a line was
always drawn between the researcher and the ob-
ject of his or her study. Even today, except in the
atomic realm, this is often true. A virologist and
the virus under the microscope are regarded as two
separate and independent entities. 5
   The attitude of meditation is exactly the oppo-
site. Remember the relationship between the sun-
shine and the green leaf. When we illuminate
something with our awareness, it changes, it
blends and merges with the awareness. For exam-
ple, when you are aware that you are happy, you
may say, "I am aware that I am happy." If you go a
step further,' you may say, "I am aware of being
aware that I am happy." There are three levels: The
happiness, the awareness of happiness, and the
awareness of being aware. I am offering this sword
of conceptual thinking in order to demonstrate a
point; but in truth, in you these three levels are
one.
   The Satipatthana Sutta,6 a Buddhist scripture
which teaches awareness, uses expressions such as
"observing the body in the body," "observing the
feelings in the feelings," "observing the mind in
the mind," "observing the objects of mind in the
objects of mind." Why are the words, body, feel-
ings, mind, and objects of mind repeated? Some
masters of the Abhidhamma say that the purpose
of this repetition is to underline the importance of
these words. I see it otherwise. I think that these


34    THE SUN MY HEART
words are repeated in order to remind us not to
separate the meditator and the object of medita-
tion. We must live with the object, identify with it,
merge with it, like a grain of salt entering the sea in
order to measure the saltiness of the sea.
   It is the same with a kung-an. A kung-an is not a
problem to be solved with the intellect. A kung-an
is not a kung-an if it is someone else's. A kung-an
is only a kung-an when it is our own. It must be
our own question of life and death-it cannot be
apart from our daily life. It must be planted in our
flesh and bones; we must be the soil which nour-
ishes it. Only then will its fruit and flowers be our
own fruit and flowers.
   The word "comprehend" is formed by combin-
ing two Latin roots: com (together) and prehendere
(take, or grasp). To understand means to take
something and join together with it. If we only ana-
lyze someone from the outside, without becoming
one with them, without entering their shoes, their
skin, we will never really understand them. The
theologian Martin Buber has said that the relation
between a person and God is not one of subject and
object, because God cannot be the object of our
knowledge. Twentieth century physicists have
come to realize that "no totally objective phe-
nomenon can exist, that is to say, independent of
the observer's mind. And correlatively, all subjec-
tive phenomena present an objective fact."7


           CHAPTER                TWO
         The Dance of the Bees
     Don't Leave Your Fate in the Hands of Others
One evening I returned to my hermitage from a
walk in the hills, and I found that all the doors and
windows of the hermitage had been blown open.
When I left the house, I hadn't secured them, and a
cold wind blew through the house, opened the
windows, and scattered the papers from my desk
all over the room. Immediately I closed the doors
and windows, lit a lamp, picked up the papers, and
arranged them neatly on my desk. Then I started a
fire in the fireplace, and soon the crackling logs
brought warmth back to the room.
   Sometimes in a crowd we feel tired, cold, and
lonely. We may wish to withdraw to be by our-
selves and become warm again, as I did at the
hermitage, sitting by the fire, protected from the
cold, damp wind. Our senses are our windows to
the outside world, and sometimes the wind blows
                                                   35


36   THE SUN MY HEART
and disturbs everything within us. Many of us
leave our windows open all the time, allowing the
sights and sounds of the world to invade us, pene-
trate us, and expose our sad, troubled selves. We
feel so cold and lonely and afraid. Do you ever
find yourself watching an awful TV program,
unable to turn it off? The raucous noises,
explosions of gunfire, are upsetting. Yet you don't
get up and turn it off. Why do you torture yourself
in this way? Don't you want to close your
windows? Are you afraid of solitude-the
emptiness and the loneliness you may find when
you face yourself alone.
   We are what we feel and perceive. If we are an-
gry, we are the anger. If we are in love, we are the
love. If we look at a snowy mountain peak, we are
the mountain. Watching a bad TV program, we are
the TV program. While dreaming, we are the
dream. We can be anything we want, even without
a magic wand. So why do we open our windows to
bad movies and TV programs, movies made by
sensationalist producers in search of easy money,
movies which make our hearts pound, our fists
tighten, and send us back into the streets ex-
hausted. Who allows such movies and TV pro-
grams to be made? Especially for the very young.
We do! We are too undemanding, too ready to
watch whatever is on the screen, too lonely, lazy,
or bored to create our own lives. We turn on the
TV and leave it on, allowing someone else to
guide us, shape us, and destroy us. Losing our-
selves in this way is leaving our fate in the hands


                               THE DANCE OF THE BEES 37
of others who may not be acting responsibly. We
must be aware of what kinds of programs do harm
to our nervous systems, our minds, and our hearts,
and which programs and films benefit us.
   I am not just talking about movies and TV pro-
grams. All around us, how many lures are set there
by our fellows and ourselves? In a single day, how
many times do we become lost and scattered be-
cause of them? We must be very careful to protect
our fate and our peace. That does not mean shut-
ting all our windows, for there are many miracles
in the world we call "outside." Open your windows
to these miracles. Look at anyone of them with the
light of awareness. Even while sitting beside a
clear, flowing stream, listening to beautiful music,
or watching an excellent movie, do not entrust
yourself entirely to the stream, the music, or the
film. Continue to be aware of yourself and your
breathing. With the sun of awareness shining in
us, we can avoid most dangers-the stream will be
purer, the music more harmonious, and the soul
of the artist completely visible in the film.
   A beginning meditator may want to leave the
city and go off to the countryside to help close those
windows that would trouble his spirit if left open.
There he or she can become one with the quiet
forest, and rediscover and restore himself or her-
self, without being carried away by the chaos of
"the outside world." The fresh and silent woods
help you remain in awareness. When awareness is
well-rooted, when you can maintain it without


38    THE SUN MY HEART
faltering, then you may wish to return to the city
and remain there, less troubled. But before you
reach this point, you must be very careful, nour-
ishing your awareness moment by moment,
choosing the surroundings and sustenance that as-
sist you the most.
  Do Not Take a Cold Shower When You Have the Flu
If you are a professional critic, you read a book or
watch a movie with an observing mind. While
reading or watching you are aware of your respon-
sibility as a critic and you do not become the "vic-
tim" of the book or film. You remain in control of
yourself. When you live in awareness, you also
remain in control of yourself. Though your win-
dows are open on the world, you are not compelled
by it. If we need to protect our senses, it is because
we are not yet strong enough to fully encounter the
world, just as someone with a cold or a flu may not
be strong enough to take a cold shower.
   I remember one day at La Boi Press, a small book
publishing company several of us started in Viet-
nam, I was invited to say something about arts and
letters. I said that they must both reveal and heal.
To reveal means to show the true situation of peo-
ple and society. To heal means to show ways to
cure them. The Buddha is often called the
Medicine King because his teaching is adapted to
each particular being and situation. Prince Sid-


                                 THE DANCE OF THE BEES 39
dhartha retired to the forest to sit beside a stream
for many years before returning to the world of
people. Today we live in noisy and polluted soci-
eties, filled with injustice, but we can take refuge in
a public park or along a river bank for a moment.
Contemporary music, literature, and entertain-
ment do little to help with healing; to the contrary
much of it compounds the bitterness, desperation,
and weariness we all feel. We need to find ways to
protect ourselves, to learn when to open and when
to close our sense-windows. This is the first step for
a beginning meditator.
    I find that I need surroundings and objects that
fit me, that contribute to my happiness, peace, and
health. Where are they? They are right there in the
"outside world." A stream in a forest, the eyes of a
child, a dear friend, an excellent book, a concert, a
delicious, healthy meal, I know these things are
available. But without awareness, I am not fully
able to enjoy and appreciate them.
        Taking Care of the Apple Tree in Your Yard
As we sit down next to a stream, we can listen to its
laughter and watch its sparkling waters, noticing
the pebbles glistening and the fresh green plants
nearby, and we may be overcome with happiness.
We are one with the stream's freshness, purity, and
clarity. But in just an instant we may find we've
had enough. Our heart is troubled, and we think of


40    THE SUN MY HEART
other things. We are no longer at one with the
stream. It is of no use to sit in a peaceful forest if
our mind is lost in the city. When we live with a
child or a friend, their freshness and warmth can
relax us. But if our heart is not with them, their
precious presence is neglected, and they no longer
exist. We must be aware of them to appreciate their
value, to allow them to be our happiness. If
through carelessness and forgetfulness we become
dissatisfied with them, and begin asking too much
of them or reprimanding them, we will lose them.
Only after they are gone will we realize their pre-
ciousness and feel regret. But once they are gone,
all our regrets are in vain.
   Around us, life bursts forth with miracles-a
glass of water, a ray of sunshine, a leaf, a caterpillar,
a flower, laughter, raindrops. If you live in aware-
ness, it is easy to see miracles everywhere. Each
human being is a multiplicity of miracles. Eyes that
see thousands of colors, shapes, and forms; ears
that hear a bee flying or a thunderclap; a brain that
ponders a speck of dust as easily as the entire cos-
mos; a heart that beats in rhythm with the heart-
beat of all beings. When we are tired and feel dis-
couraged by life's daily struggles, we may not notice
these miracles, but they are always there.
   Have a look at the apple tree in your yard. Look
at it with complete attention. It is truly a miracle. If
you notice it, you will take good care of it, and you
too are part of its miraculousness. Even after caring
for it for only a week, its leaves are already greener


                               THE DANCE OF THE BEES 41
and shinier. It is exactly the same with the people
who are around you. Under the influence of
awareness, you become more attentive, under-
standing, and loving, and your presence not only
nourishes you and makes you lovelier, it enhances
them as well. Our entire society can be changed by
one person's peaceful presence.
   Our minds create everything. The majestic
mountain top, brilliant with snow, is you yourself
when you contemplate it. Its existence depends on
your awareness. When you close your eyes, as long
as your mind is present, the mountain is there.
Sitting in meditation, with several sense-windows
closed, you feel the presence of the whole universe.
Why? Because the mind is there. If your eyes are
closed, it is so that you can see better. The sights
and sounds of the world are not your "enemies."
Your "enemy" is forgetfulness, the absence of
mindfulness.
                Don't Become a Colony
As I write, French workers are struggling to reduce
their work week from 40 hours to 35. They are
working hard to accomplish this, but these five
hours, how will they use them? If they use them
the way they spend their Saturday nights, sitting at
a bar or in front of a TV, it will be a terrible waste.
We all need time to relax and to live, but how?
Usually when we have some free time, we watch


42   THE SUN MY HEART
whatever is on TV in order to avoid "having
nothing to do," which means staying home alone
with ourselves. Watching TV may make us more
tired, more nervous, more unbalanced, but we
rarely notice these results. The free time we strug-
gle so hard for is seized by TV broadcasting compa-
nies and the products of their advertisers. We end
up being their colony. We have to find ways to use
our precious time to rest and be happy.
   We can choose good TV shows to watch, beauti-
ful places to go, meetings with dear friends, books
and records that suit us well. And we can live in a
relaxed, contented way with what we have chosen.
Remember we are whatever we choose. Have you
ever been on a beach when the sun rises, or on a
mountain top at noon? Did you stretch your arms
wide and breathe deeply, filling your lungs with
pure, clean air, with unbounded immensity? Did
you feel as if you were just the sky, the sea, the
mountain? If you are too far away from the sea or a
mountain, you can sit cross-legged and breathe
gently and deeply, and the sea, the mountain, the
entire universe will enter you.
      The Known is Not Separate from the Knower
To be aware is to be aware of something. When the
mind settles on the mountain, it becomes the
mountain. When it settles on the sea, it becomes
the sea. When we say "know," both the known and


                                THE DANCE OF THE BEES 43
the knower are included. When we meditate on
our body, we are our body; we limit our observa-
tions to our body, even though we realize that our
body is not separate from the rest of the universe. If
we meditate on limitless space, we become limit-
less space (akasanantyayatana). If we meditate on
the consciousness which includes both space and
time, we reach the state of limitless consciousness
(vijiiananantyayatana). If we meditate on the absence
of identity of all things, we enter the state of noth-
ingness (akiiicanyayatana). If we meditate on the
non-distinction between knower and known, we
come to the state of "neither perception nor non-
perception" (naivasaiijiianasaiijiiayatana). The Four
Formless States of Consciousness are not as diffi-
cult to reach as you might think, provided aware-
ness is there to shine on every movement of the
mind.
   You may try to experience one of these-which,
if any, is not important. The key point is never to
let your awareness stand apart from whatever you
regard as the object of awareness. Once you are
aware, body, mountain top, or flowing river, all
become your mind.
             Letting Go of "In" and "Out"
You may have noticed that each time I use the ex-
pression "outside world," I put it in quotes. This is
because to me it is not really "outside." Look deeply


44   THE SUN MY HEART
at this: Is the world outside your body? Is it outside
your mind? Our body-blood, flesh, bones-be-
longs to this "outside world." In fact, our brain and
nervous system do not escape it either. Perhaps the
several hundred square centimeters that comprise
our brain can be considered "inside." But no, the
brain occupies space, and space is part of the
"outside world," isn't it?
   Is our mind in the "inner" world? Where is
mind to be found? Can you identify it in space?
No, all you can do is observe it, observe it observ-
ing itself. Please try looking at your mind as
though it were something physical. We know that
the mind is related to the brain and to the nervous
system. It is memory, feeling, thought, perception,
knowledge. These mental phenomena have
physiological roots; they are born and they die; they
have intensity. Can we locate them in space and
time? In space, the nervous system serves as their
base. In time, they may appear yesterday or today or
tomorrow. So mind itself may be regarded as part
of the so-called "outer" world. Continue to exam-
ine and you will find that everything seems to be-
long to the "outside" world. But outside of what?
How can there be an "outer" without an "inner"?
   Do not jump to the conclusion that the "outer"
world is located in the mind and that the mind
encloses the entire universe. That conclusion con-
tinues to accept the distinction between "inside"
and "outside." To say, "Everything is found inside
the mind; there is nothing outside the mind," is as


                               THE DANCE OF THE BEES 45
absurd as saying, "It is mind that realizes the outer
world."
   Our confusion stems from the habit of distin-
guishing "in" and "out." In normal daily life, this
distinction is necessary. If we stay indoors, we may
be comfortable dressing lightly, even on a cold
winter day. But if we go outside without dressing
more warmly, we may catch a cold. Concepts such
as high and low, one and many, coming and going,
birth and death, are all important in everyday life.
But when we leave the realm of the practical to
meditate on the true nature of the universe, we
must also leave behind these concepts. For exam-
ple, when you raise your eyes to look up at the
stars and the moon, you say that they are "above."
But at the very same moment, for someone
standing on the opposite side of the planet, the di-
rection you are looking is "below" for them. When
looking at the entire universe, we have to abandon
all these concepts of high and low, and so forth.
             Reality Cannot Be Contained
Abandoning concepts is of prime importance for a
meditator. When we observe our body, our feel-
ings, our thoughts, our perceptions, we situate
them in space and time just as when we observe
physical phenomena. We see psychological phe-
nomena and physical, physiological phenomena.


46   THE SUN MY HEART
   You may ask, "When mind becomes the object
of its own observation, is that which is grasped
mind itself or only a projection or reflection of
mind?" This is a good question. You may also want
to ask, "When physiological and physical phe-
nomena are observed as objects, do they keep their
true nature or do they become just a projection or
reflection of reality, transformed by becoming ob-
jects of observation?" Our mind creates cate-
gories-space and time, above and below, inside
and outside, myself and others, cause and effect,
birth and death, one and many-and puts all phys-
ical and psychological phenomena into categories
like these before examining them and trying to
find their true nature. It is like filling many differ-
ent shapes and sizes of bottles with water in order
to find out the shape and size of water. Truth itself
transcends these concepts, so if you want to pene-
trate it you must break all the conceptual categories
you use in normal daily life. The Theory of Rela-
tivity recognizes that if you do not abandon the
idea that space and time are absolute and indepen-
dent of one another, you cannot make progress in
understanding the universe. Quantum Theory
says that if you want to understand the world of
subatomic particles, you must leave behind matter
and empty space, cause and effect, front and back,
concepts so useful in daily life.


                               THE DANCE OF THE BEES 47
Understanding is the Fruit of Meditation, Not of Thought
Quantum theorists today know that the
consciousness of the observer is in a very close
relationship with the object observed, and they are
directing more and more of their attention to that
consciousness. In 1979, France-Culture organized a
one-week meeting in Cordoba, Spain, on "Mind
and Science." Many renowned scholars were pre-
sent, and a number of them affirmed their convic-
tion that the world and mind have the same na-
ture.
   Although some scientists have seen the funda-
mental characteristic of mind, I am afraid that
most still want to study it like any other object in
their laboratories. Then it is no longer mind, but
the projection or reflection of it, framed by concep-
tions. Remember the phrase from the Satipatthana
Sutta: "Observe the body in the body, observe the
feelings in the feelings, observe the mind in the
mind, observe the objects of mind in the objects of
mind." This means that you must live in the body
in full awareness of it, and not just study it like a
separate object. Live in awareness with feelings,
mind, and objects of mind. Do not just study them.
When we meditate on our body, we live with it as
truth and give it our most lucid attention; we be-
come one with it. The flower blossoms because
sunlight touches and warms its bud, becoming one
with it. Meditation reveals not a concept of truth,
but a direct view of truth itself. This we call Insight,


48    THE SUN MY HEART
the kind of understanding based on attention and
concentration.
   Thinking is to take cinder blocks of concepts
from the memory warehouse and build monu-
ments. We call these hovels and palaces
"thoughts." But such thinking, by itself, has no
creative value. It is only when lit by understanding
that thinking takes on real substance. Understand-
ing does not arise as a result of thinking. It is a re-
sult of the long process of conscious awareness.
Sometimes understanding can be translated into
thoughts, but often thoughts are too rigid and lim-
ited to carry much understanding. Sometimes a
look or a laugh expresses understanding much
better than words or thoughts.
                  The Dance of the Bees
Have you ever read a book or seen a film about
bees? When a worker bee finds a hillside covered
with flowers, she flies back to the hive to tell her
mates exactly where the flowers are, and she does it
with a dance. She can even tell them of places
quite far away. K. von Frisch revealed this to us
after studying the language of the dance of the
bees. s
   We humans also know how to dance. Some of
us dance with our bodies, others with painting or
music. Even our spoken and written words are no
more than the steps of a dance, the notes of a song,


                                THE DANCE OF THE BEES   49
the strokes of a painting. They may be more or less
skillful. They may translate our vision poorly or
well. The skill is not only in the hands of the artist
or the words of the speaker; the listener too must
be skillful and perceptive. With words it is espe-
cially difficult to escape from conceptual categori-
zations; and even if the speaker skillfully avoids
them, the listener can still fall into their traps. Re-
member the empty bottles? They had definite
shapes and sizes even before being filled. People
who practice Zen often advise not using words.
This is not to discredit words, but to avoid the
danger of becoming stuck in them. It is to encour-
age us to use words as skillfully as possible for the
sake of those who hear them.
   In the second century, Nagarjuna wrote The
Madhyamika Sastra, in which he used concepts to
destroy concepts. He was not trying to create a new
doctrine, but to break all the bottles, all the flasks, all
the vases, all the containers, to prove that water
needs no form to exist. He outlined a dance for us,
a dance for us to drop our categories and barriers so
that we can directly encounter reality and not con-
tent ourselves with its mere reflection.


50   THE SUN MY HEART
        Knowledge is a Barrier to Understanding
The great discoveries of science are the result of
understanding rather than thought. Scientists'
tools are not just their intellects and laboratories;
their whole beings down to their depths are hard at
work. Intellect prepares the soil of the mind and
sows the seeds there. Until the seeds sprout, intel-
lect can do no more. To try would only be floun-
dering in a void. Then, at unexpected moments,
the seeds send shoots up into the intelligence.
These moments usually come because the scientist
has "hatched" them. He or she has "sat" on the
problem while awake, asleep, eating, walking, until
suddenly a solution! The new discovery breaks the
old knowledge, and the intellect is forced to destroy
today's structures to build tomorrow's. Old knowl-
edge is the obstacle to new understanding; Bud-
dhism calls it "the barrier built of knowledge." Like
those who are awakened, great scientists have un-
dergone great internal changes. If they are able to
achieve profound realizations, it is because their
powers of observation, concentration, and aware-
ness are deeply developed.
   Understanding is not an accumulation of
knowledge. To the contrary, it is the result of the
struggle to become free of knowledge. Under-
standing shatters old knowledge to make room for
the new that accords better with reality. When
Copernicus discovered that the Earth goes around
the sun, most of the astronomical knowledge of


                                THE DANCE OF THE BEES 51
the time had to be discarded, including the ideas of
above and below. Today, physics is struggling
valiantly to free itself from the ideas of identity
and cause/effect that underlie classical science.
Science, like the Tao (Way), urges us to get rid of all
preconceived notions.
    When Shakyamuni Buddha put forth the no-
tion of "not self," he upset many concepts about
life and the universe. He blasted our most firm and
widespread conviction-that of a permanent self.
Those who understand "not self" know that its
function is to overthrow "self," not to replace it
with a new concept of reality. The notion of "not
self" is a method, not a goal. If it becomes a concept,
it must be destroyed along with all other concepts.
                  Unable to Describe It
Understanding, in humans, is translated into con-
cepts, thoughts, and words. Understanding is not
an aggregate of bits of knowledge. It is a direct and
immediate penetration. In the realm of sentiment,
it is feeling. In the realm of intellect, it is percep-
tion. It is an intuition rather than the culmination
of reasoning. Every now and again it is fully pre-
sent in us, and we find we cannot express it in
words, thoughts, or concepts. "Unable to describe
it," that is our situation at such moments. Insights
like this are spoken of in Buddhism as "impossible
to reason about, to discuss, or to incorporate into
doctrines or systems of thought."


52   THE SUN MY HEART
                      Who Knows?
We boast of the knowledge that we, as humans,
have achieved. These are the treasures of our
species, transmitted since the beginning of time
when we were "inorganic," on the edge of becom-
ing "organic." When we discuss "knowing," we
immediately think of humans with our large
brains, forgetting that knowing is present in all
species, even those we consider inanimate. Cer-
tainly, bees, spiders, and wasps, are highly skilled-
they build beautiful structures. Looking at a bee
hive, a wasp's nest, or a spider's web, we admit
their know-how, but we say, "These species do not
know how to think. They cannot do mathematics.
They cannot plan and design projects. They don't
have intelligence. All they have is instinct." Still, it
was not we humans who gave them nests and
webs, it was the little "brainless" creatures them-
selves who designed and built those marvelous
architectures that we so admire. If they do not
know, who does? They know. Their species in its
evolution has acquired this knowledge.
   When we look at plants, we also see miracles of
knowing. The apple tree knows how to make roots,
branches, leaves, flowers, and fruit. You say that
the apple tree, having no intelligence, has no other
choice. But your ribs, your glands, your backbone,
have you created them with your intelligence? It is
the work of "knowing," which embraces all, in-
cluding our ability to think.


                                THE DANCE OF THE BEES 53
                 Knowing in the Blue Sky
Let us try to move away from our notions of self
and use a kind of language in which the subject is
absent. For example, we say, "It is raining." "It" is
the subject, but that really does not tell us anything.
We may say, "The rain is falling." "Rain" is the
subject and "is falling" the verb. But this sentence
does not make much sense either, because when it
is raining there must be water falling or it is not
rain. So we can say, "Raining in London," or
"Raining in Chicago," without using a subject, and
the reality is clearly expressed.
   Let us use the word "know" in this way.
"Knowing in the person." "Knowing in the bee."
"Knowing in the apple tree." It sounds strange be-
cause we are used to using a subject when we
speak. The word "knowing" here can be either a
subject or a verb, as in "Raining in London" or
"Raining in Chicago." If "Raining in London"
means there is rain in London, then "Knowing in
the person" means there is knowledge in the per-
son, nothing is obscured! To my mind, under-
standing is present everywhere, always unfolding.
Knowing in Fred, knowing in Rachel, knowing in
a bee, knowing in an apple tree, knowing in noth-
ingness, knowing in the Milky Way. If we can say,
"Raining in Chicago," there is no reason we cannot
say, "Knowing in the blue sky."9 While conducting
a week-long retreat on the practice of not-self, a
Zen master might propose to the retreatants that


54   THE SUN MY HEART
they use only this language, without subjects. I am
sure this method would bear excellent results.
             There is Knowing in the Wind
Let us amuse ourselves for a moment with a
dance, so that we can better understand "knowing."
Suppose I say, "1 know that it's windy." "1" refers
more to my mind than my body, so this sentence
really means, "My mind knows that it is windy."
Mind is the knower, so really we are saying, "The
knower knows that it is windy." "The knower" is
the subject, "knows" is the verb, and "it is windy"
is the object. But it is funny to say, "The knower
knows," isn't it? We imagine that the knower is an
entity which exists independently of its object and
which resides in our brain making brief excursions
into the "outside world" to see what is happening
out there. Just as we use a ruler to measure some-
thing, we fit our mind to a preconceived model,
one that was created by our mind itself. Therefore,
what we call "mind" is not pure and true mind. It
is enmeshed in concepts.
   When we say, "1 know the wind is blowing," we
don't think that there is something blowing some-
thing else. "Wind" goes with "blowing." If there is
no blowing, there is no wind. It is the same with
knowing. Mind is the knower; the knower is mind.
We are talking about knowing in relation to the
wind. "To know" is to know something. Knowing


                                  THE DANCE OF THE BEES 55
is inseparable from the wind. Wind and knowing
are one. We can say, "Wind," and that is enough.
The presence of wind indicates the presence of
knowing, and the presence of the action of blowing.
If we reduce the sentence "I know the wind is
blowing" to simply "Wind," we can avoid gram-
matical mistakes and approach reality. In daily life,
we have grown used to a way of thinking and ex-
pressing ourselves that is based on the idea that
everything is independent of everything else. This
way of thinking and speaking makes it difficult to
penetrate non-dualistic, non-discriminatory reality,
a reality which cannot be contained in concepts.
              Each Action Its Own Subject
The wind blows. The rain falls. The river flows. In
sentences like these we can see clearly that the
subject and the verb are one and the same. There is
no wind without "blowing," no rain without "fall-
ing," no river without "flowing." If we look close-
ly, we can see that the subject of the act is in the
action, that the act itself is exactly its own subject.
   The most universal verb is the verb to be: I am,
you are, the mountain is, a river is. The verb "to
be" does not express the dynamic living state of the
universe. To express that we must say "become."
These two verbs can also be used as nouns: ''being,''
"becoming." But being what? Becoming what?
"Becoming" means "evolving ceaselessly" and is as


56   THE SUN MY HEART
universal as the verb "to be." It is not possible to
express the "being" of a phenomenon and its
"becoming" as if the two were independent. In the
case of wind, "blowing" is the being and the
becoming. For rain, its being and becoming are
"falling." For the river, its being and becoming are
"flowing."
   We say that "rain falls," but "fall" is not the
most precise term. Snow, leaves, and even radia-
tion also fall. If we say "to rain," that would be a
more precise description for the activity of the
subject "rain." We can say, "The rain rains," to de-
scribe this activity, using "rain" as both subject and
verb. Or we can just say, "Raining," or even,
"Rain." In the same way we can say, "The painter
paints," "The reader reads," "The meditator medi-
tates." Following this pattern of usage we can also
say, "The king kings," "The mountain moun-
tains," "The cloud clouds." The reason for the ex-
istence of the king is to be king, to act king. The
reason for the existence of the mountain is to be, to
act, to do mountain. "Acting-being" king means
doing what a king does-reigning over the people,
giving royal audiences, and a thousand other
things. So, as in the case of "rain rains," we can
simply say, "The king kings." Then the first word
is the subject and the second the verb, a verb which
is not universal, a verb which is used just for
kings. Thus each subject becomes a verb, and the
verb is the being of the subject. To our ears, "The
painter paints," sounds better than "The king


                               THE DANCE OF THE BEES 57
kings;" but in fact there is no difference between
them. Many, many years ago, Confucius used this
kind of language. He said, "King kings, subject
subjects, parent parents, child childs." That is, "The
king is-does king," "The subject is-does subject,"
and so on. We can add further explanations, such
as, "The king must do his duty as a king," or "A
king must serve sincerely as king," but in the end
these additions and embellishments add nothing.
When we have seen that each action is its own
subject, we can begin to comprehend the immense
application of the word "knowing."
        Inanimate Objects, Do You Have a Soul?
We are so used to thinking of "knowing" in terms
of feelings and perceptions that we label inorganic
objects "inanimate, insensitive, devoid of intelli-
gence." But these things are only inanimate from
our point of view. A rock is composed of countless
molecules, which are in turn composed of count-
less atomic and subatomic particles, which are all
held together by electro-magnetic and nuclear
forces. Atoms are not lifeless bits of solid, inert
matter. They are vast empty spaces in which in-
finitely small particles (protons, electrons, neu-
trons, and so forth) are in perpetual movement at
enormous speeds. Why do they act this way? Can
we still say that a rock is "inert, inanimate, insen-
sitive?" The poet Lamartine once asked, "Inani-


58   THE SUN MY HEART
mate objects, do you have a soul?"IO If we define
soul according to our ideas and beliefs, no doubt
they haven't, or at least, they do not manifest it.
But in the sense of a dynamic, living reality, they
surely do!
     The Known Manifests Itself in Countless Ways
"Knowing" reveals itself in many ways.
"Knowing" can be active whenever there is hear-
ing, seeing, feeling, comparing, remembering,
imagining, reflecting, worrying, hoping, and so
forth. In the Vijfianavadin school of Buddhism,
which specialized in the study of "conscious-
nesses," many more fields of activity were at-
tributed to knowing. For instance, in alayavijfiana,
or "store-house consciousness," the fields of activ-
ity of "knowing" are "maintaining, conserving,
and manifesting." According to the Vijfianavadins,
all sensation, perception, thought, and knowledge
arise from this basic store-house consciousness.
Manyana is one of the ways of knowing based on
this consciousness and its function is to grasp onto
the object and take it as a "self." Manovijfiana serves
as the headquarters for all sensations, perceptions,
and thoughts, and makes creation, imagination, as
well as dissection of reality possible. Amala is the
consciousness that shines like a pure white light
on the store-house consciousness. 1 1


                                THE DANCE OF THE BEES 59
   In any phenomena, whether psychological,
physiological, or physical, there is dynamic move-
ment, life. We can say that this movement, this
life, is the universal manifestation, the most
commonly recognized action of knowing. We
must not regard "knowing" as something from the
outside which comes to breathe life into the uni-
verse. It is the life of the universe itself. The dance
and the dancer are one.
      Tasting Yourself at the Foot of an Apple Tree
You know, I haven't been saying all this just to
provide amusement, juggling words and under-
standing for your entertainment. These are tools
which we can use to shatter and demolish our ha-
bitual and troublesome ways of thinking, old
habits forged by our everyday lives. These are
chisels and crowbars and axes to dismantle our
furniture or split trees into logs for the fire. To split
a log, you must insert a wedge into a crack and
hammer at it until the log gradually splits in two.
In the same way, reading this may put a wedge in
you, depending on your interest, and your
meditation practice. If what I have been saying is
not clear for you, it may be because you are not yet
used to seeing in this upside-down way. It may be
the first time you have been encouraged to
examine reality with a non-discriminatory spirit.
Or it may be that my dancing is still too clumsy. It


60   THE SUN MY HEART
doesn't matter. We will try to find another way. If
we cannot enter through one particular door, there
are many others to try. In Buddhism it is said there
are 84,000 doors to enter into the Dharma. I think
we have to create even more. The point is to "see
into" reality, not to understand what I am saying.
My words can only be hints of an evocative dance,
a pointing finger. You must see with your own
eyes, eyes opened in full awareness.
   I hope you are not going to transform my words
into concepts, new concepts that can be stored in-
side you. I don't want to give you anything. I only
want to dance for you, like the bee. If you see
something, you must realize that you yourself
have seen it. It is in you, not in my dance. Please go
and sit next to a sleeping child. Look at the child.
Or go into your yard and sit at the foot of an apple
tree. Or go into the kitchen and make yourself a
cup of tea. Whatever you do, do it in full atten-
tiveness, in full awareness. Do not lose yourself in
forgetfulness. Please don't think at all about be-
coming one with the child, the tree, the tea. There
is no need to think at all. Taste yourself with the
child, taste yourself with the tree, taste yourself
with the tea while a smile blossoms on your lips.


        CHAPTER                T  H  R  E  E
  The Universe in a Speck of Dust
               Mind and Object Are One
T he other afternoon, when I returned to my her-
mitage, I closed all the doors and windows because
it was so windy. This morning, my window is open
and I can see the cool, green forest. The sun is
shining and a bird is singing beautifully. Little
Thuy has already left for school. I must stop writing
for a moment so I can look at the trees stretching
across the hillside. I am aware of their presence and
my own presence. It is not always necessary to close
our sense-doors in order to be concentrated.
Beginning meditators, to make concentrating on
their breath or another object easier, may find it
beneficial to close their sight and sound windows,
but concentration is also possible with these win-
dows open. Sense objects do not exist just outside
the body. Even while we are not seeing, hearing,
smelling, or tasting, we cannot ignore the feelings
                                                   61


62   THE SUN MY HEART
inside our bodies. When you have a toothache, or
a cramp in your leg, you feel the pain. When all
your organs are healthy, you feel a sense of well-
being. Buddhism speaks of three kinds of feelings:
pleasant, unpleasant, and neutral. But really, so-
called neutral feelings can be quite pleasant, if we
are aware.
   The feelings inside the body are an uninter-
rupted stream, whether we are aware of them or
not, so to "close all our sense-doors" is actually
impossible. Even if we were somehow able to bar-
ricade them, the mind and consciousness would
continue to work, and we would have images,
concepts, and thoughts arising from memory.
Some people think that to meditate is to separate
ourselves from the world of thoughts and feelings
and return to a kind of pure state where the mind
contemplates itself and becomes "true mind."12 It is
a lovely idea, but it is basically misleading. Since
mind is not separate from the world of thoughts
and feelings, how can it leave and retire into itself?
When I look at the trees in front of me, my mind
does not go outside of me into the forest, nor does
it open a door to let the trees in. My mind fixes on
the trees, but they are not a distinct object. My
mind and the trees are one. The trees are only one
of the miraculous manifestations of the mind.
        Forest.
        Thousands of tree-bodies and mine.
        Leaves are waving,


                          THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 63
         Ears hear the stream's call,
         Eyes see into the sky of mind,
         A half-smile unfolds on every leaf.
        There is a forest here
         Because I am here.
         But mind has followed the forest
         And clothed itself in green.
The sage enters samadhi, and he or she does not
know there is an "outside world" to keep out or an
"inside world" to penetrate. The world reveals it-
self, even when the eyes are closed. The world is
neither inner nor outer. It is vital and complete in
any object of contemplation-the breath, the tip of
the nose, a kung-an, or anything else, as tiny as a
speck of dust or as huge as a mountain. Whatever
the object, it is not fragmented from ultimate
reality. In fact, it contains the vast totality of reality.
          Small Is Not Inside, Big Is Not Outside
I invite you to meditate with me. Please sit in a
position that you find relaxing, so that you are
comfortable, and place your attention on your
breathing, letting it become very gentle, very light.
After a few moments, move your attention to the
feelings in your body. If you feel any pain or dis-
comfort, or if you feel anything pleasurable, bring
your attention there and enjoy that feeling with all
of your awakened consciousness. After a little


64    THE SUN MY HEART
while, notice the functioning of your different or-
gans-your heart, lungs, liver, kidneys, digestive
system, and so forth. Normally these organs func-
tion without difficulty and do not attract your at-
tention unless they are in pain. Notice the blood
flowing like a river through the countryside,
nourishing the fields with fresh water.
   You know that this river of blood nourishes all
the cells of your body and that your organs, com-
posed of cells, enrich (digestive system), purify
(liver, lungs), and propel (heart) the blood. All the
body's organs, including the nervous system and
glands, rely on each other for existence. Lungs are
necessary for blood, so lungs belong to blood. Blood
is necessary to lungs, so blood belongs to lungs. In
the same way we can say lungs belong to heart,
liver belongs to lungs, and so forth, and we see that
every organ in the body implies the existence of all
the others. This is called, "the interdependence of
all things," or "interbeing" in the Avatamsaka Sutra.
Cause and effect are no longer perceived as linear,
but as a net, not a two-dimensional one, but a sys-
tem of countless nets interwoven in all directions
in multi-dimensional space. Not only do the or-
gans contain in themselves the existence of all the
other organs, but each cell contains in itself all the
other cells. One is present in all and all are present
in each one. This is expressed clearly in the
Avatamsaka Sutra as, "One is all, all is one."
   When we fully grasp this, we are freed from the
pitfall of thinking of "one" and "many," a habit


                        THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 65
that has held us trapped for so long. When I say,
"One cell contains in itself all the other cells," do
not misunderstand me and think that there is
some way that one cell's capacity can be stretched to
fit all the others inside of it. I mean that the pres-
ence of one cell implies the presence of all the oth-
ers, since they cannot exist independently, separate
of the others. A Vietnamese Zen master once said,
"If this speck of dust did not exist, the entire uni-
verse could not exist."13 Looking at a speck of dust,
an awakened person sees the universe. Beginners
in meditation, although they do not see this as
clearly as an apple in their hand, are able to under-
stand it with observation and reflection. The
Avatamsaka Sutra contains phrases that can terrify
and confuse readers who have not meditated on
the principle of interdependence. "In every speck
of dust I see innumerable Buddha worlds, in each
of these worlds countless Buddhas shining, their
precious auras shining." "Putting one world in all
worlds, putting all worlds in one world." "Innu-
merable Sumeru Mountains can be hung on the
end of a hair." In the phenomenal world, things
seem to exist as separate entities which have a spe-
cific place: "This" is on the outside of "that." When
we deeply penetrate the principle of inter-
dependence, we see that this sense of separateness
is false. Each object is composed of and contains all
others. In the light of meditation on interdepen-
dence, the concept of "one/many" collapses, and
takes with it "large / small," "inside / outside," and


66   THE SUN MY HEART
all the others. The poet Nguyen Cong Tru, upon
realizing this, exclaimed:
        In this world and in the worlds beyond,
        Buddha is incomparable!
        Small is not inside.
        Big is not outside.1 4
                   The Sun My Heart
Since we now realize that "One is all, all is one" in
our bodies, let us go another step and meditate on
the presence of the entire universe in ourselves.
We know that if our heart stops beating, the flow
of our life will stop, and so we cherish our heart
very much. Yet we do not often take the time to
notice that there are other things, outside of our
bodies, that are also essential for our survival.
Look at the immense light we call the sun. If it
stops shining, the flow of our life will also stop,
and so the sun is our second heart, our heart out-
side of our body. This immense "heart" gives all
life on earth the warmth necessary for existence.
Plants live thanks to the sun. Their leaves absorb
the sun's energy, along with carbon dioxide from
the air, to produce food for the tree, the flower, the
plankton. And thanks to plants, we and other
animals can live. All of us-people, animals, and
plants-"consume" the sun, directly and indirectly.
We cannot begin to describe all the effects of the


                        THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 67
sun, that great heart outside of our body. In fact,
our body is not limited to what lies inside the
boundary of our skin. Our body is much greater,
much more immense. If the layer of air around
our earth disappears even for an instant, "our" life
will end. There is no phenomenon in the universe
that does not intimately concern us, from a pebble
resting at the bottom of the ocean, to the move-
ment of a galaxy millions of light years away. The
poet Walt Whitman said, "I believe a leaf of grass
is no less than the journey-work of the stars .... "
These words are not philosophy. They come from
the depths of his souL He said, "I am large, I con-
tain multitudes."lS
            Interbeing and Interpenetration
The meditation that I just suggested might also be
called "Interbeing Endlessly Interwoven," that is,
meditation on the manifestation of all phenomena
as interdependent. This meditation can help free
us from the concepts of "unity I diversity," or
"onel all." This meditation can dissolve the con-
cept of "me," because the concept of self is built on
the opposition of unity and diversity. When we
think of a speck of dust, a flower, or a human be-
ing, our thinking cannot break loose from the idea
of unity, of one, of calculation. We see a line be-
tween one and many, between one and not one. In
daily life we need this just as a train needs a track.


68    THE SUN MY HEART
But if we truly realize the interdependent nature of
the dust, the flower, and the human being, we see
that unity cannot exist without diversity. Unity
and diversity interpenetrate each other freely.
Unity is diversity. This is the principle of interbe-
ing and interpenetration of the Avatamsaka Sutra.
   Interbeing means "This is that," and "That is
this." Interpenetration means "This is in that," and
"That is in this." When we meditate deeply on in-
terbeing and interpenetration, we see that the idea
of "one/many" is only a mental construct which
we use to contain reality, much as we use a bucket
to hold water. Once we have escaped the confine-
ment of this construct, we are like a train breaking
free of its rails to fly freely in space. Just as when we
realize that we are standing on a spherical planet
which is rotating around its own axis and around
the sun, our concepts of above and below disinte-
grate, so when we realize the interdependent na-
ture of all things, we are freed from the idea of
"one/many."
   The image of a Indra's jeweled net is used in the
Avatamsaka Sutra to illustrate the infinite variety of
interactions and intersections of all things. The net
is woven of an infinite variety of brilliant gems,
each with countless facets. Each gem reflects in
itself every other gem in the net, and its image is
reflected in each other gem. In this vision, each
gem contains all the other gems.
   We can also use an example from geometry.
Imagine a circle with its center point "e". The circle


                        THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 69
is composed of all the points equidistant from C.
The circle is there because all the points are there.
If even one point is missing, the circle immediately
disappears. It is like a house of cards. Remove one
card and all the rest collapse. Each card depends on
all the others, and without each one there is no
house. The presence of one point of the circle de-
pends on the presence of all the other points. Here
too we see that "One is all, all is one." Every point
of the circle is of equal importance. Every card in
the house of cards is of equal importance. Each is
vital to the existence of the whole and therefore to
the existence of all the other parts. This is interde-
pendence.
   To envision the interwoven nature of relation-
ships, which illustrate the character of interbeing
and interpenetration, we can picture a sphere
which is composed of all the points on its surface
and all the points within its volume. There are ex-
tremely many points, yet without each of them the
sphere does not exist. Now let us imagine
connecting each point with all the other points.
First we connect point A to each of the other
points. Then we connect point B with each of the
others, including A, and so on until all the points
are connected. As you can see we have woven an
extremely dense net intertwining all the points.
   "The Bodhisattva sees the interdependent na-
ture of all things, sees in one dharma all dharmas,
sees in all dharmas one dharma, sees the multi-
plicity in the one and the one in the multiplicity,


70   THE SUN MY HEART
sees the one in the immeasurable and the immea-
surable in the one. Birth and existence of all dhar-
mas is of a changing nature and thus unreal and
cannot touch the enlightened ones." As I men-
tioned earlier, in contemporary physics there is the
"bootstrap" idea which is very close to the idea of
interbeing and interpenetration. "Bootstrap" re-
nounces the idea of basic elements of matter. The
universe is a network of interdependent phenom-
ena in which each phenomenon is formed by the
coordination of all other phenomena. The uni-
verse is a dynamic fabric of interdependent events
in which none is the fundamental entity. What we
call particles are only mutual relationships among
the particles themselves. 16
   Someone may ask, "Although I agree that each
phenomenon depends on all other phenomena for
its birth and existence, where does the all, the com-
plete body which includes all phenomena, come
from?" Would you please give him an answer?
                Eyes Opening in Samadhi
Meditation is not imitation, but creation. Medita-
tors who only imitate their instructors cannot go
far. The same is true of cooking, or anything. A
good cook is someone with a creative spirit. You
can enter the Meditation on the Interdependence
of All Phenomena through many different doors-
observing your internal organs: blood, heart, in-


                       THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 71
testines, lungs, liver, kidneys; or thousands of
other means, including thoughts, feelings, images,
poetry, dreams, or a river, a star, a leaf, and so on.
   A good practitioner uses meditation throughout
daily life, not wasting a single opportunity, a single
event, to see deeply the nature of dependent co-
arising. All day long practice is carried out in
perfect concentration. With eyes open or closed,
the nature of meditation is no other than samadhi.
You can discard the idea that you must close your
eyes to look inside and open them to look outside.
A thought is no more an inner object than a
mountain an outer one. Both are objects of know-
ledge. Neither is inner or outer. Great concentra-
tion is achieved when you are fully present, in
profound communion with living reality. At these
times the distinction between subject and object
disappears and you penetrate living reality with
ease, are one with it, because you have set aside all
tools for measuring knowledge, knowledge which
Buddhism calls "erroneous knowledge."17
         Seeing and Loving Always Go Together
There are times while watching our children play
that we think about the future. We know that life
is filled with worries, fears, hopes, and disap-
pointments, and we worry for them and anxiously
think about the struggles before them. It is at that
very moment that we enter into our children. It is


72    THE SUN MY HEART
easy to find our way into them because we know
they are of our own blood.
   Meditation is the same. As we meditate on the
interdependent nature of all things, we can pene-
trate reality easily, and see the fears, anguish,
hopes, and despair of all beings. Watching a green
caterpillar on a leaf, we understand the importance
of the caterpillar, not just from our self-centered
point of view as a human, but from the penetra-
tion based on the interdependence of all things.
Realizing the preciousness of the life of every be-
ing, we dare not deprive the caterpillar of its life. If
some day we have to kill a caterpillar, we will feel
as if we are killing ourselves, that something of
ourselves dies with the caterpillar.
   In ancient times, people hunted to feed them-
selves and their families. They did this in order to
live. They did not kill just for amusement. Today
some people hunt for pleasure. The interdepen-
dence of all beings is not a philosophical game re-
moved from spiritual and practical life. In bringing
to light the interdependence of all phenomena, the
meditator comes to see that the lives of all beings
are one, and he or she is overcome with compas-
sion for all. When you feel this love you know that
your meditation is bearing fruit. Seeing and loving
always go together. Seeing and loving are one.
Shallow understanding accompanies shallow
compassion. Great understanding goes with great
compassion.


                        THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 73
                      Heartbreak
Have you ever watched a wildlife show on public
television, where predators hunt other animals for
food? The tiger hunts a deer or a snake swallows a
frog. These shows are filled with suspense. We
hope that the deer will escape the tiger's claws, and
the frog will be saved from the snake's fangs. It is
painful to watch the tiger tear apart the deer and
the frog disappear into the snake's mouth. This
kind of program is not invented-it is real life. We
long for the well-being of the frog and the deer, but
rarely do we consider that the tiger and the snake
must also eat in order to live. We humans eat
chickens, pigs, shrimp, fish, and cows, and, like the
tiger and the snake, even deer and frogs. Yet be-
cause it is painful to watch, we take the side of the
prey and hope it will escape.
   In these situations, as meditators, we must re-
main very clear. We cannot take either side, be-
cause we exist in both. Some people can remain
unmoved or even enjoy the sight of a tiger tearing
apart its prey, but most of us, feeling its agony, take
the side of the victim. If a scene like this were oc-
curring in front of us, we would try to find a way to
save the deer and the frog. But we have to be
careful not to do this just to avoid our own an-
guish. We must also feel the pain of the tiger or
snake deprived of food, and have compassion for
them. All beings have to struggle to survive. The


74   THE SUN MY HEART
more deeply we penetrate into life, the more we
see its miracles and the more we see its heart-
breaking and terrifying events. Have you seen the
life of a spider? Have you lived through a war?
Have you seen torture, prison, and killing? Have
you seen a pirate rape a young girl on the high
seas?
  Reconciliation Originates in the Heart of Compassion
Millions of people follow sports. If you love to
watch soccer, you probably root for one team and
identify with them. You watch the games with de-
spair and elation. Perhaps you give a little kick to
help the ball along. If you do not take sides, the fun
is missing. In wars we pick sides, usually the side
which is being threatened. Peace movements are
born of this feeling. We get angry, we shout, but
rarely do we rise above all this to look at a conflict
the way a mother would who is watching her two
children fighting. She seeks only their reconcilia-
tion. Real efforts for reconciliation must arise from
this heart of compassion which arises from medi-
tating on the nature of interbeing and
interpenetration of all beings.
   In our lives, we may be lucky enough to meet
someone whose love extends to animals and
plants. We may also know people who, although
they themselves live in a safe situation, realize
that famine, disease, and oppression are destroying


                         THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 75
millions of people on earth and look for ways to
help those who suffer. They cannot forget them,
even amidst the pressures of their own lives. At
least to some extent, these people have realized the
interdependent nature of life. They know that the
survival of the underdeveloped countries cannot
be separated from the survival of the materially
wealthy, technically advanced countries. Poverty
and oppression bring war. In our times, every war
involves all countries. The fate of each country is
linked to the fate of all others.
               Little Room for Compassion
In a civilization where technology is crucial for
success, there is little room for compassion. But
when we meditate deeply on life, we come to
identify even with ants and caterpillars. If we be-
come farmers, we may fail because we will probably
refuse to use insecticides to kill pests. And if we do
not have the heart to kill an animal, how can we
point a gun at another human being? If we become
officials in the Department of Defense, we may en-
courage people to become conscientious objectors.
If we become Governors, we may oppose building
nuclear power plants in our states, and so we will
be ousted from the system. Many of us share these
kinds of feelings. We are ill at ease with our soci-
ety, and in a variety of ways we express our oppo-
sition.


76   THE SUN MY HEART
   David Bohm, a physics professor at the Univer-
sity of London, said, "If we want society to change,
a few superficial and individual changes, or
changes in the economic system are not enough. A
complete change in consciousness is necessary. We
don't know yet how this change is to be realised,
but I am certain that it is absolutely vital."18 This
change of consciousness, as we have seen, can be
achieved by realizing the interdependent nature of
reality, a realization that each of us can experience
in a unique way. This kind of realization is not the
result of any ideology or system of thought, but is
the fruit of the direct experience of reality in its
multiple relationships. It requires the dropping of
habitual thinking which fragments reality, a reality
that is actually indissoluble.
                Fearless in Life and Death
Continue to practice the meditation on interde-
pendence for awhile and you will notice a change
in yourself. Your perspective will widen, and you
will find that you look at all living beings with
compassion. The grudges and hatreds that you
thought were impenetrable will begin to
erode, and you will find yourself caring for each
and every being. Most important, you will no
longer be afraid of life and death.
   Perhaps you have heard of Erwin Schrodinger,
who discovered wave mechanics. After reflecting


                         THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 77
on the self, life and death, the universe, and unity
and multiplicity, he wrote,
        Thus you can throw yourself flat on the ground,
        stretched out upon Mother Earth, with the cer-
        tain conviction that you are one with her and
        she with you. You are as firmly established, as
        invulnerable as she, indeed a thousand times
        firmer and more invulnerable. As surely as she
        will engulf you tomorrow, so surely will she
        bring you forth anew to new striving and suffer-
        ing. And not merely 'some day': now, today, ev-
        ery day she is bringing you forth, not once but
        thousands upon thousands of times, just as every
        day she engulfs you a thousand times over. For
        eternally and always there is only now, one and
        the same now; the present is the only thing
        that has no end.1 9
If a view like Schrodinger's is well rooted in our
daily lives, we will be immovable before life and
death.
      Past, Present, and Future on the Tip of a Hair
Schrodinger's observation about time encourages
us to take another step in our meditation on inter-
dependence. Our conceptions of inner and outer,
one and many, begin to fall away when we look at
the nature of interbeing and interpenetration of all
things. But these ideas will not drop away com-
pletely as long as we believe that absolute space and


78   THE SUN MY HEART
absolute time are necessary for the appearance of
all phenomena. In the early days of the Dharma-
laksana ("Meditation on Phenomena") School of
Buddhism, space was viewed as an absolute reality
outside the realm of birth and death. When the
Madhyamika ("Meditation on Noumena," or es-
sential nature) School began to develop, time and
space were described as false conceptions of reality
which depend on one another for existence. Since
the principle of interbeing and interpenetration in
the Avatamsaka Sutra refuses to accept the concepts
of inner/outer, big/small, one/many as real, it also
refuses the concept of space as an absolute reality.
With respect to time, the conceptual distinction
between past, present, and future is also destroyed.
The Avatamsaka Sutra says that past and future can
be put into the present, present and past into fu-
ture, present and future into past, and finally all
eternity into one ksana, the shortest possible mo-
ment. To summarize, time, like space, is stamped
with the seal of interdependence, and one instant
contains three times: past, present, and future.
        The past in the present and future
        The future in the present and past
        Three times and several aeons in an instant
        Not long, not short-that is liberation.
        I can penetrate the future
        putting all eternity into one instant.


                        THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 79
The Avatamsaka Sutra continues, "Not only does a
speck of dust contain in itself 'infinite' space, it also
contains 'endless' time; in one ksana we find both
'infinite' time and 'endless' space."20
        Past present and future on the tip of a hair
        And innumerable Buddha worlds as well.
          Entering the World of Interdependence
              with the Theory of Relativity
The Avatamsaka Sutra says that time and space
contain each other, depend on one another for ex-
istence, and are not separable by knowledge. The
Relativity Theory of Albert Einstein, born 2000
years later, confirms the inseparable relationship of
time and space. Time is considered the fourth di-
mension of the four dimensional space-time con-
tinuum. 21 This theory refutes the hypothesis that
space is an absolute and immutable framework in-
side of which the universe is evolving. The idea of
absolute and universal time is simultaneously de-
stroyed. It proclaims that space is simply the posi-
tional ordering of relationships of things among
themselves in a given reference frame, and time is
nothing more than the chronological ordering of
events in a given reference frame.
   Time, according to the theory, can only be local
and not universal. This is why the concept "now"


80    THE SUN MY HEART
can only be applied to "here" and not to other
places in the universe. Likewise, "here" can only
be applied to this instant, "now," and not to either
past or future. This is because time and space can
only exist together. They cannot exist indepen-
dently of one another. This theory allows us to use
scientific discoveries about the relative nature of
space and time to break down our ideas based on
"infinite" space and "endless" time, such ideas as
finite and infinite, inside and outside, before and
after. If we look up at the sky and wonder what ex-
ists beyond the outermost edge of the universe, we
still do not understand relativity and still have not
shed the idea of an absolute space that exists inde-
pendent of things. And if we ask where the uni-
verse is heading, it is because we still believe in
eternal, universal time. The Theory of Relativitiy
contributes to the progress of both science and phi-
losophy. It is a pity that Einstein did not take this
superb spaceship even further on the voyage into
the world of reality.
                 A Raft to Cross the River
With all new scientific discoveries comes the de-
struction of some old ideas of reality. One merit of
the Theory of Relativity is that it overturned the
classical ideas of time and space through its elabo-
ration of the space-time continuum. According to
the theory, everything has a four-dimensional


                       THE UNIVERSE IN A SPECK OF DUST 81
structure and is located in curved four-dimen-
sional space-time. Dropping the Euclidean three-
dimensional straight line model of the universe,
Einstein imagined a universe composed of curved
lines in a four-dimensional space-time continuum.
In 1917 he proposed this model in which space is
seen as a three-dimensional facet of a four-dimen-
sional hyperspace, with time as an axis. If we try to
imagine this for a sphere, we will no longer see a
sphere; instead we will see a hypercylinder in
which each minute is a separate sphere, much like
the sequence of separate image-frames of a film.
Einstein's universe is at the same time finite and
infinite, because it is composed of curved space-
time lines and not separate straight lines that be-
long either to time or to space. An ant walking on
an orange can always go straight ahead, never
reaching the end, because it is walking on a curved
path. But the ant stays on the orange; that is its
limit. Einstein's model generalized straight lines
and reconciled finite and infinite.
   Yet if endless time and infinite space are only
forms of perception, the curved four-dimensional
space-time continuum, although closer to reality, is
still just another form of perception. If space can-
not be conceived without the presence of "things,"
the four dimensions of space-time are no more
than mental creations in relation to the ideas of
"thing" and "movement." The space-time curve
must be thought of as only an idea which replaces
those of three-dimensional space, endless time,


82   THE SUN MY HEART
and straight lines. It must be left behind, the same
way we leave behind the raft after we have crossed
the river.
  The Ability to Abandon and the Capacity to Discover
Reality is transformed by our looking at it, because
we enter it with our baggage of concepts. Modern
physicists know this. Some of them have readily
abandoned concepts that have long formed the ba-
sis of science-ideas such as cause and effect, and
past, present, and future. But it is not easy to aban-
don concepts. We think that penetrating reality
without arming ourselves with ideas is like going
into battle empty handed. The armor of a scientist
is his or her acquired knowledge and system of
thought, and it is most difficult to leave that be-
hind. I believe that the scientists with the greatest
ability to abandon that "armor" are the ones who
have the greatest capacity to make discoveries.
   Religious seekers have always been reminded
that they must let go of all their concepts in order
to directly experience reality, from the concepts of
self and other, to those of birth and death, perma-
nence and impermanence, existence and nonexis-
tence. If reality is described as inconceivable, the
tool to directly experience reality must be a mind
pure of all concepts.


          CHAPTER               F 0   U  R
 Cutting the Net of Birth & Death
          Mind Creates the Form of Reality
Yesterday afternoon, little Thuy surprised her
teacher. After lunch, she took a broom and swept
the classroom floor without anyone asking her to.
No child in the village had ever done that before.
Later in the afternoon, after class, Thuy's teacher
followed her up the hill to our cottage to tell me
about it. I told her that all poor children in my
country would have done the same thing. They
take care of housework by themselves without be-
ing asked by the adults.
   Today is a French holiday and Thuy is off from
school. She and I took a walk this morning, and
together we collected pine cones. She told me that
the earth gives birth to pine cones so we can use
them to start fires to keep warm in winter, but I
told her that pine cones are there to give birth to
baby pine trees, not for lighting fires. Rather than
                                                   83


84    THE SUN MY HEART
being disappointed by my explanation, her eyes got
even brighter.
   Do you remember our conversation about the
concepts of space and time in the Avatamsaka Sutra
and in the Theory of Relativity? Once we abandon
the concepts of absolute space and absolute time,
many related concepts that have long formed our
patterns of thinking begin to break down. Bootstrap
theorists recognize that all atomic particles, such as
electrons, cannot exist independently of one an-
other. They are actually "interconnections" among
particles, and these "particles" are in turn "inter-
connections" among other particles. No particle
has an independent nature. This is very close to
interdependence, interbeing, and interpenetration.
   The Theory of Relativity has had a significant
influence on our understanding of nuclear parti-
cles. In relativity, mass and energy are the same,
just as we discovered that rain can be the subject
and the verb of a sentence at the same time. When
we know that mass is only a form of energy, we
come to the realization that "interconnections"
among particles are themselves dynamic realities
of four-dimensional space-time. For today's scien-
tists, a nuclear particle, just like "a speck of dust" or
"the tip of a hair" in the Avatamsaka Sutra, com-
bines both space and time. These particles can be
considered a "speck" of time, just as the shortest
possible moment (ksana) in the Avatamsaka Sutra is
said to contain not only past, present, and future,
but also matter and space. A particle can no longer


                   CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 85
be thought of as a three-dimensional object (like a
marble or a speck of dust) situated in space. It has
become more abstract to our minds. Electrons, for
example, can be called "dynamic four-dimensional
bodies in space-time" or "waves of probability."
We must keep in mind that words such as
"particle," "body," and "wave" no longer have the
same meanings as in ordinary language.
Contemporary physics has struggled to go beyond
the world of concepts, and as a result, particles are
now regarded as abstract mathematical quantities
(from the point of view of ordinary, discriminative
knowledge).
   Some scientists proclaim that the properties of
nuclear particles are nothing but creations of their
own minds, that in reality particles have no prop-
erties independent of the minds of those observing
them. This implies that in the world of particles,
the mind which perceives reality in fact creates it.
               Observer and Participant
For physicists today, the object of mind and the
mind itself cannot be separated. Scientists can no
longer observe anything with complete objectivity.
Their minds cannot be separated from the objects.
John Wheeler has suggested that we replace the
term "observer" with the term "participant." For
there to be an "observer," there must be a strict
boundary between subject and object, but with a
"participant," the distinction between subject and


86    THE SUN MY HEART
object blurs and even disappears, and direct experi-
ence is possible. This notion of a participant/ ob-
server is very close to meditation practice. When
we meditate on our body, according to the Satipat-
thana Sutta we meditate on "the body in the body"
(emphasis added). This means that we do not con-
sider our body as a separate object, independent of
our mind which is observing it. Meditation is not
measuring or reflecting on the object of the mind,
but directly perceiving it. This is called "perception
without discrimination" (nirvikalpajiiana).
   The habit of distinguishing the mind from its
object is so deeply ingrained in us that only gradu-
ally, with meditation, can we eliminate it. The
Satipatthana Sutta presents four objects of medita-
tion: the body, feelings, mind, and objects of mind.
This kind of meditation was practiced by the disci-
ples of the Buddha during his lifetime. Classifying
reality this way is to help our meditation, not to
help us in the analysis of these things. In the Sutta,
all material phenomena are regarded as "objects of
mind." Of course we can observe that body, feel-
ings, and even mind can also be categorized as
"objects of mind." The fact that all phenomena,
including material ones, are considered "objects of
mind" in the Sutta clearly shows that since the ear-
liest times, Buddhism opposed discriminating be-
tween mind and its objects.


                   CUTIING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 87
           Mountains are Again Mountains,
                Rivers are Again Rivers
Elementary-particle physicists, when they return
home from a day's work in their laboratories, often
have the feeling that ordinary objects, such as a
chair or a piece of fruit, have lost the substantiality
they seemed to have previously. After entering the
world of elementary particles, these scientists can-
not find anything essential in the world of matter
except their own minds. Alfred Kastler said,
"Matter can only be considered from its two com-
plementary aspects, which are waves and particles.
Objects or things that had always been thought of
as constituents of nature must be renounced."22
   Although a chair or an orange may no longer be
"matter" for us, we must still sit on the chair and
eat the orange. We are composed of the same
essence as they are, even if it is just a mathematical
formula which we ourselves can contrive.
Meditators realize that all phenomena interpene-
trate and inter-are with all other phenomena, so in
their everyday lives they look at a chair or an or-
ange differently from most people. When they
look at mountains and rivers, they see that "rivers
are no longer rivers and mountains are no longer
mountains." Mountains "have entered" rivers,
and rivers "have entered" mountains (interpene-
tration). Mountains become rivers, and rivers be-
come mountains (interbeing). However, when


88   THE SUN MY HEART
they want to go for a swim, they have to go into the
river and not climb the mountain. When they re-
turn to everyday life, "mountains are again
mountains, rivers are again rivers."
              Neither Form Nor Emptiness
A scientist who realizes the nature of interdepen-
dence among particles is likely to be influenced in
the way he or she perceives reality even in every-
day life. Because of this, some kind of transforma-
tion may occur in his or her spiritual life as well.
Meditators who realize the interpenetration and
interbeing of things also undergo a change in
themselves. Former concepts of "one's self" and
"objects" dissolve and they see themselves in ev-
erything and all things in themselves. This trans-
formation is the primary goal of meditation. This
is why "awareness of being" is maintained
throughout the day and not just during periods of
meditation. A meditator is aware when he or she is
walking, standing, lying down, and so forth. There
are certainly scientists who also do this, reflecting
on their topic of research all day long, through
their whole beings, even as they eat or bathe.
   The notion of inter-origination (paratantra) is
very close to living reality. It annihilates dualistic
concepts, one/many, inside/outside, time/space,
mind/matter, and so forth, which the mind uses to
confine, divide, and shape reality. The notion of


                     CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 89
inter-origination can be used not only to destroy
habits of cutting up reality, but also to bring about a
direct experience of reality. As a tool, however, it
should not be considered a form of reality in itself.
   Paratantra is the very nature of living reality, the
absence of an essential self. Just as a triangle exists
only because three lines intersect each another, you
cannot say any thing exists in itself. Because they
have no independent identity, all phenomena are
described as empty (sunya). This does not mean that
phenomena are absent, only that they are empty of
an essential self, of a permanent identity indepen-
dent of other phenomena. In the same way, in
bootstrap physics the word "particles" does not
mean three-dimensional specks which exist
independently of one another.
   The word "emptiness" here is different from the
everyday term. It transcends the usual concepts of
emptiness and form. To be empty is not to be non-
existent. It is to be devoid of a permanent identity.
To avoid confusion, Buddhist scholars often use
the term "true emptiness" to refer to this kind of
emptiness. Zen Master Hue Sinh, who lived in the
11 th century during the Ly dynasty, said that we
cannot use the words empty and form to describe
objects because reality is beyond these two concepts:
        Dharmas are the same as non-dharmas,
        Neither existing nor not existing.
        He who fully understands this
        Realizes that all beings are Buddha.


90    THE SUN MY HEART
         The Udumbara Flower is Still Blooming
There is a practice called Meditation on True Emp-
tiness, in which the practitioner lets go of habitual
ways of thinking about being and non-being by re-
alizing that these concepts were formed by in-
correctly perceiving things as independent and
permanent. When an apple tree produces flowers,
we don't see apples yet, and so we might say,
"There are flowers but no apples on this tree." We
say this because we do not see the latent presence of
the apples in the flowers. Time will gradually re-
veal the apples.
   When we look at a chair, we see the wood, but
we fail to observe the tree, the forest, the carpenter,
or our own mind. When we meditate on it, we can
see the entire universe in all its inter-woven and
interdependent relations in the chair. The presence
of the wood reveals the presence of the tree. The
presence of the leaf reveals the presence of the sun.
The presence of the apple blossom reveals the
presence of the apple. Meditators can see the one in
the many, and the many in the one. Even before
they see the chair, they can see its presence in the
heart of living reality. The chair is not separate. It
exists only in its interdependent relations with ev-
erything else in the universe. It is because all other
things are. If it is not, then all other things are not ei-
ther.
   Every time we use the word "chair" or the con-
cept "chair" forms in our mind, reality is severed


                    CUTIING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 91
in half. There is "chair" and there is everything
which is "not-chair." This kind of separation is
both violent and absurd. The sword of conceptu-
alization functions this way because we do not
realize that the chair is made entirely from non-
chair elements. Since all non-chair elements are
present in the chair, how can we separate them?
An awakened individual vividly sees the non-
chair elements when looking at the chair, and re-
alizes that the chair has no boundaries, no begin-
ning, and no end.
   When you were small, you may have played
with a kaleidoscope. So many wonderful images
are formed by bits of colored glass between two
lenses and three mirrors. Each time you move
your fingers slightly, a new and equally beautiful
image appears. We could say that each image has a
beginning and an end, but we know that the true
nature of it, lenses and colored glass, does not come
into being or end with each new configuration.
These thousands or millions of patterns are not
subject to the notion of "beginning and end." In
the same way, we follow our breathing and medi-
tate on the beginningless and endless nature of
ourselves and the world. Doing so, we can see that
liberation from birth and death is already within
reach.
   To deny the existence of a chair is to deny the
presence of the whole universe. A chair which ex-
ists cannot become non-existent, even if we chop it
up into small pieces or burn it. If we could succeed


92     THE SUN MY HEART
in destroying one chair, we could destroy the entire
universe. The concept of "beginning and end" is
closely linked with the concept of "being and non-
being." For example, from what moment in time
can we say that a particular bicycle has come into
existence and from what moment is it no longer
existent? If we say that it begins to exist the mo-
ment the last part is assembled, does that mean we
cannot say, "This bicycle needs just one more part,"
the prior moment? And when it is broken and
cannot be ridden, why do we call it "a broken bicy-
cle?" If we meditate on the moment the bicycle is
and the moment it is no longer, we will notice that
the bicycle cannot be placed in the categories "being
and non-being" or "beginning and end."
    Did the Indian poet Rabindranath Tagore exist
before his birth or not? Does he exist after his death
or has he ceased to exist? If you accept the principle
from the Avatamsaka Sutra of "interpenetration" or
the principle from bootstrap physics of
"interbeing," you cannot say that there has ever
been a time when "Tagore is not," even the times
before his birth or after his death. If Tagore is not,
the entire universe cannot be, nor can you or I ex-
ist. It is not because of his "birth" that Tagore exists,
nor because of his "death" that he does not exist.
    Late one afternoon I was standing on Vulture
Peak in the Indian state of Bihar when I saw a very
beautiful sunset, and suddenly I found that Shak-
yamuni Buddha was still sitting there:


                   CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 93
       The great mendicant of old is still there on
           Vulture Peak
        contemplating the beautiful sunset.
       Gotama, how strange!
       Who said that the Udumbara flower
           blooms only once every 3,000 years?
       That sound of the rising tide,
        you cannot help hearing it
       if you have an attentive ear.
   I have heard several friends express regret that
they did not live at the time of the Buddha. I think
that even if they passed him on the street, they
would not recognize him. Not only Tagore and
Shakyamuni Buddha, but all of us are without be-
ginning and without end. I am here because you
are there. If anyone of us does not exist, no one else
can exist either. Reality cannot be confined by con-
cepts of being, non-being, birth, and death. The
term "true emptiness" can be used to describe real-
ity and to destroy all ideas which imprison and di-
vide us and which artificially create a reality.
Without a mind free from preconceived ideas, we
cannot penetrate reality. Scientists are coming to
realize that they cannot use ordinary language to
describe non-conceptual insights. Scientific lan-
guage is beginning to have the symbolic nature of
poetry. Today such words as "charm" and "color"
are being used to describe properties of particles
that have no conceptual counterpart in the


94    THE SUN MY HEART
"macro-realm." Some day reality will reveal itself
beyond all conceptualizations and measurements.
        The Tathagata Neither Arrives Nor Departs
This non-conceptualizable reality, or true empti-
ness, is also called "suchness" (bhutatathata). Such-
ness, sometimes translated "thusness," means "it is
so." It cannot be conceived or described through
words and concepts but must be directly experi-
enced. Suppose there is a tangerine on the table
and someone asks you, "What does it taste like?"
Rather than give an answer, you have to section
the tangerine and invite the questioner to have a
taste. Doing this, you allow him or her to enter the
suchness of the tangerine without any verbal or
conceptual description.
   To remind his disciples of the unconditioned,
beginningless and endless nature of reality, Bud-
dha asked them to address him as the Tathagata.
This is not an honorific title. Tathagata means
"one who thus comes" or "one who thus goes." It
means he arises from suchness, abides in suchness,
and returns to suchness, to non-conceptualizable
reality. Who or what does not arise from suchness?
You and I, a caterpillar, a speck of dust all arise
from suchness, all abide in suchness, and some day
will return to suchness. Actually, the words "arise
from," "abide in," and "return to" have no real
meaning. One can never leave suchness. In the


                       CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH  95
Anuradha Sutra, the Buddha replied to a question
which was troubling many monks: "What happens
to the Tathagata after death? Does he continue to
exist? Does he cease to exist? Does he both continue
and cease to exist? Does he neither continue nor
cease to exist?"
   The Buddha asked Anuradha, "What do you
think? Can the Tathagata be recognized through
form?"
   "No, master."
   "Can the Tathagata be found outside of form?"
   "No, master."
   "Can the Tathagata be recognized through feel-
ing, perception, mental formations, or con-
sciousness ?"
   "No, master."
   "Anuradha, you cannot find the Tathagata even
in this life, why do you want to solve the problem
of whether I will continue to exist or cease to exist,
or both continue and cease to exist, or neither con-
tinue nor cease to exist after death?"23
   Robert Oppenheimer, the physicist known as the
father of the first atomic bomb, had a chance to
read this section of the Anuradha Sutra. He under-
stood it based on his observations of particles,
which cannot be confined by concepts of space,
time, being, or not-being. He wrote:
        To what appeared to be the simplest questions, we
        will tend to give either no answer or an answer which
        will at first sight be reminiscent more of a strange
        catechism than of the straightforward affirmatives of


96   THE SUN MY HEART
        physical science. If we ask, for instance, whether the
        position of the electron remains the same, we must
        say "no;" if we ask whether the electron's position
        changes with time, we must say "no;" if we ask
        whether the electron is at rest, we must say "no;" if
        we ask whether it is in motion, we must say "no.,,24
   As you can see, the language of science has al-
ready begun to approach the language of Bud-
dhism. After reading the above quote from the
Anuradha Sutra, Oppenheimer said that until this
century scientists would not have been able to un-
derstand the Buddha's replies of 2,500 years ago.
    The Net of Birth and Death Can be Torn Asunder
There is another meditation which can be used in
place of the one on true emptiness. It is called the
meditation on the miraculousness of existence.
"Existence" means being in the present. "The
miraculousness of existence" means to be aware
that the universe is contained in each thing, and
that the universe could not exist if it did not con-
tain each thing. This awareness of interconnected-
ness, interpenetration, and interbeing makes it
impossible for us to say something "is" or "is not,"
so we call it "miraculous existence."
   Even though Oppenheimer replied "No" four
times to the questions about the nature of elec-
trons, he did not mean that electrons are nonexis-
tent. Even though the Buddha said, "You cannot


                   CUTIING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 97
find the Tathagata even in this life," he did not
mean that the Tathagata is nonexistent. The Great
Prajfia Paramita Sutra uses the word "not-empty"
(asunya) to describe this state. "Not-empty" is the
same as "the miraculousness of existence." "True
emptiness" and "the miraculousness of existence"
can keep us from falling into the trap of discrimi-
nating between being and non-being.
   Both electrons and Tathagata are beyond the
concepts of being and non-being. The nature of
true emptiness and the miraculousness of exis-
tence of the electrons and the Tathagata save us
from the traps of being and non-being and lead us
directly into the world of non-conceptualization.
How can we practice the meditation on the
miraculousness of existence? Anyone who under-
stands the theory of relativity knows that space is
intimately connected with both time and matter.
For such persons, space has a larger meaning than
for persons who still believe that space exists inde-
pendently of time and matter. When we look at a
bee, we may like to see it first through the eyes of a
physicist who understands relativity, and then go
even beyond that to see true emptiness and the
miraculousness of existence in it. If you attempt to
do this regularly, with your whole being, I am sure
that it will free you from entanglement in the net
of birth and death. In Zen circles, the problem of
birth and death has always been regarded as the
most urgent. Zen Master Hakuin calligraphed the
character for Death quite large and then added in


98    THE SUN MY HEART
smaller strokes: "Anyone who sees to the depths of
this word is a true hero."25
   I used to think that liberation from birth and
death was a remote goal. While I was teaching at
the Van Hanh Buddhist University in Saigon, I
looked at the statues of emaciated Arahats, and I
thought it must be necessary to deplete our
strength that much, to reduce our desires until to--
tal exhaustion overtakes us, to realize this libera-
tion. But later, while I was practicing at Phuong
Boi, in central Vietnam, I realized that liberation
from birth and death is not an abstract or long-term
project. Birth and death are only concepts. To be
free from these concepts is to be free from birth and
death. It is attainable.
   But liberation from birth and death cannot come
from intellectual comprehension alone. When you
see the interdependent nature of everything in the
universe, when you understand the meaning of
true emptiness and the miraculousness of exis-
tence, you have sown the seeds of liberation in the
field of your consciousness. For these seeds to grow
we need to practice meditation. Through the prac-
tice of meditation, we may become strong enough
to break through the concept of birth and death,
which is really just one of the many, many con-
cepts we create.
   A physicist who is able to see the interpenetra-
tion and interbeing of elementary particles without
going beyond his or her intellect has, from the
viewpoint of Buddhist liberation, attained just a


                   CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 99
decorative fa<;ade. Someone who studies Bud-
dhism without practicing meditation has also ac-
cumulated knowledge only as decoration. We hold
our own fates in our own hands. We have the ca-
pacity to practice until all concepts about birth and
death, and being and non-being, are uprooted.
    The images which I have offered-the sun, an
orange, a chair, a caterpillar, a bicycle, electrons,
and so forth-can be objects which bring us to a di-
rect experience of reality. Meditate on the sun as
your second heart, the heart of your "outer-self."
Meditate on the sun in every cell of your body.
Meditate to see the sun in plants, in each nour-
ishing morsel of the vegetables you eat. Gradually
you will see "the body of ultimate reality"
(Dharmakaya) and recognize your own "true na-
ture." Then birth and death can no longer touch
you, and you will have attained success. Tue
Trung, a 14th century Vietnamese Zen master,
wrote:
        Birth and death,
        You have been crushing me.
        Now you can no longer touch me.
Please meditate deeply on these two sentences un-
til you can see Tue Trung in each cell of your body.


100   THE SUN MY HEART
              A Leaf Can Lead Us Directly
              into Non-Conceptual Reality
The Lin-chi school of Zen in China developed the
use of kung-ans (Japanese: koans) as tools for awak-
ening. By making the meditator keep one subject
in mind, kung-ans aid in creating strong
concentration. Here are a few examples of kung-
ans that are presented as questions:
        What was your true face before your parents
           brought you into the world?
        What is the sound of one hand clapping?
        Everything returns to the one. Where does
           the one return?
Using the form of questions demands our atten-
tion. Some kung-ans, such as the following, are not
presented as questions, but still have the same
questioning effect:
        A dog does not have the nature of awaken-
           ing.
        Nothing is sacred.
        Te-shan's hair is white, Tche-hai's is black.
Questioning, therefore, is an important element in
the practice of meditation using a kung-an. The
goal of kung-an practice is to shatter concepts and
conceptualizing. Although not their intention,
kung-ans sometimes confine the meditator in his


                  CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 101
thoughts and conceptualizations for too long. Often
it is only when the practitioner arrives at an
impasse and is completely exhausted from concep-
tual thinking that he or she is ready to drop con-
cepts and return to himself or herself. I think this
is a weakness of Zen kung-an practice.
   In meditation on "interbeing" or on "the mirac-
ulousness of existence," a practitioner can take any
phenomenon as the object of meditation, but he or
she must be able to maintain it for some time, in
mindfulness. She may choose the sun, a leaf, a
caterpillar. Such meditation is not so enigmatic as
kung-an meditation, but if the practitioner is de-
termined to keep the sunlight of her awareness on
it hour after hour, she will succeed. This kind of
meditation keeps the practitioner from wasting a
lot of time straining her intellect looking for solu-
tions to questions that cannot be solved through
the intellect. The sun, a leaf, or a caterpillar can
take the practitioner directly into the world of non-
conceptual reality-a living, direct experience.
      Unobstructed Mind and Unobstructed Object
Another important meditation, called "Mind and
Object Contain One Another," aims at ending all
discrimination between the mind and its objects.
When we look at the blue sky, the white clouds,
and the sea, we are prone to seeing them as three
separate phenomena. But if we look more care-


102    THE SUN MY HEART
fully, we can see that the three are of the same na-
ture and cannot exist independently of one an-
other. If you say, "I was afraid of the snake I just
encountered," you treat the snake as physical and
fear as psychological. The meditation on "Mind
and Object Contain One Another" is a means of
overcoming that kind of separation.
   Leibniz, a German mathematician, proposed
that not only colors, light, and temperature, but
also forms, content, and movement of everything
in the universe may be nothing but properties
which the mind projects onto reality. In light of
quantum theory, no one today can continue to
think, as Descartes did, that mind and object are
two distinct realities which exist independently
and separately from one another.
   To say it simply, in the sentence, "I was afraid of
the snake," we recognize an "I," a snake, and fear.
Fear, a psychological phenomenon, is not only in-
extricably tied to the physical phenomena "I" and
snake, it is inextricably woven into the web of the
entire universe and has the same nature as the
universe. The concept "fear" includes the concept
"snake" and the concept of the person who is afraid
of being bitten by the snake. If we try to be objec-
tive, we may find ourselves unsure about what
exactly is the nature of a snake or the nature of a
person, but fear is a direct experience we can rec-
ognize and identify.
   In the meditation on interdependence, we can
see that each moment of consciousness includes


                  eUITING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 103
the whole universe. This moment might be a
memory, a perception, a feeling, a hope. From the
point of view of space, we can call it a "particle" of
consciousness. From the point of view of time, we
can call it a "speck" of time (ksana). An instant of
consciousness embraces all past, present, and fu-
ture, and the entire universe.
   When we speak of mind, we usually think of
psychological phenomena, such as feelings,
thoughts, or perceptions. When we speak of objects
of mind, we think of physical phenomena, such as
mountains, trees, or animals. Speaking this way,
we see the phenomenal aspects of mind and its
objects, but we don't see their nature. We have ob-
served that these two kinds of phenomena, mind
and objects of mind, rely on one another for their
existence and are therefore interdependent. But we
do not see that they themselves have the same na-
ture. This nature is sometimes called "mind" and
sometimes called "suchness" (tathata) or God.
Whatever we call it, we cannot measure this na-
ture using concepts. It is boundless and all inclu-
sive, without limitations or obstacles. From the
point of view of unity, it is called Dharmakaya.
From the point of view of duality, it is called
"mind without obstacle" encountering "world
without obstacle." The Avatamsaka Sutra calls it
unobstructed mind and unobstructed object. The
mind and the world contain each other so com-
pletely and perfectly that we call this "perfect unity
of mind and object."


104   THE SUN MY HEART
              The Great and Perfect Mirror
In 1956, in a lecture on Mind and Matter at Trinity
College in Cambridge, the physicist Erwin Schro-
dinger asked whether consciousness should be
singular or plural. He concluded that from the
outside, there seem to be many minds but that in
reality there is only one. 26 Schrodinger had been
influenced by Vedanta philosophy. He was very
interested in what he called "the arithmetical para-
dox" of mind. As we have seen, the separation of
one and many is a measurement made by per-
ception. As long as we are prisoners of that separa-
tion, we are prisoners of the arithmetical paradox.
We can only be free when we see the interbeing
and interpenetration of everything. Reality is nei-
ther one nor many.
   The Vijftanavadins described "perfect unity of
mind and object" as "a mirror in which all phe-
nomena are reflected." Without phenomena, there
can be no reflections, and without reflections, there
can be no mirror. The image used to describe mind
is "a large, round mirror which nothing can cover
and nothing can hide." All phenomena are said to
be stored in a "store-house" (alaya). The contents
and the proprietor (subject of knowledge) in this
store are one. In the teachings of the Vijftana-
vadins, alaya contains the seeds (bija) of all physical,
physiological, and psychological phenomena. At
the same time it functions as the ground from
which the subjects and objects of knowledge arise.


                  eUITING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 105
Alaya is not bounded by space or limited by time. In
fact, even space and time arise from alayaP
   Crucial to the Vijftanavada teaching is under-
standing the object of perception. They are of three
types: pure objects or reality in itself (svabhava),
representations or conceptualized visible objects
(samanya-Iaksana), and pure images or conceptu-
alized objects that remain in memory and may
reappear in the mind when the correct conditions
are present.
                Manyana and Vijiiapti
From the alaya arise two kinds of consciousness,
manyana and vijiiapti. Vijiiapti causes all feelings,
perceptions, concepts, and thoughts to appear. It is
based in the sense organs, the nervous system, and
the brain. The object of vijiiapti is reality in itself
(svabhava) and is possible only when feelings and
perceptions are pure and direct. When seen
through the veil of conceptualization, the same
object can be only an image of reality (samanya
laksana) or a pure image such as a dream while
asleep or a daydream. Although the object of a pure
sensation is reality in itself, when this reality is
seen through concepts and thoughts, it is already
distorted. Reality in itself is a stream of life, always
moving. Images of reality produced by concepts are
concrete structures framed by the concepts of space-


106   THE SUN MY HEART
time, birth-death, production-destruction, exis-
tence-nonexistence, one-many.
   Manyana is a kind of intuition, the sense that
there is a separate self which can exist indepen-
dently of the rest of the world. This intuition is
produced by habit and ignorance. Its illusory nature
has been constructed by vijflapti, and it, in turn,
becomes a basis for vijflapti. The object of this intu-
ition is a distorted fragment of alaya which it con-
siders to be a self, comprised of a body and a soul. It
of course is never reality in itself, but just a repre-
sentation of reality. In its role as a self as well as
consciousness of the self, manyana is regarded as
the basic obstacle to penetrating reality. Contem-
plation performed by vijflapti can remove the er-
roneous perceptions brought about by manyana.
   Within vijflapti, there are six consciousnesses:
consciousness of seeing, hearing, smelling, tasting,
touching, and thinking. The mind-consciousness
(manovijflana) has the broadest field of activity. It
can be active in conjunction with the other senses,
for example awareness of seeing. It can also be ac-
tive on its own, such as in conceptualizing, re-
flecting, imagining, and dreaming. Following the
five consciousnesses of the senses, mind-con-
sciousness is called the sixth consciousness.
Manyana (or manas) and alaya are the seventh and
eighth consciousnesses.


                    CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 107
      To See Reality with the Eyes of Understanding
As already mentioned, it is only in the case of pure
sensation that the object of consciousness is reality-
in-itself. The senses are only of relative value in
penetrating reality. That is why, although the con-
tent of any sensation is reality-in-itself, what is
sensed is never reality in its entirety. Science has
shown, for example, that human eyes can perceive
only a minute portion of the electromagnetic spec-
trum. Radium and cosmic rays are among the
many waves which are of too high a frequency for
us to see. We cannot see radio waves. When we
see light and and hear sounds, we perceive only
waves within certain frequencies. Infra-red rays are
invisible to us, as they have longer wave lengths
than are visible to us. Since x-rays have shorter
wave lengths than those of visible light, we cannot
see them either. Everything in the universe would
appear quite different if we could see x-rays! Nor
can we hear the high-pitched sounds to which the
ears of dogs and other animals are sensitive.
Among animals on the earth, many can perceive
much more of reality than we humans can.
   Therefore, the perfect ultimate reality of the
universe can only be observed with eyes of great
understanding, but these eyes can only open when
the concepts which compose the manyana and at-
tachment to wrong views are uprooted. Only then
can the alaya reveal itself as a great, perfect mirror
reflecting the whole universe.


108    THE SUN MY HEART
                 Is Alaya One or Many?
If we were to ask, "Does everyone have his or her
own alaya, or do we all share a common alaya?," it
would show that we have not yet realized the true
nature of interbeing and interpenetration. We are
still bewildered by what Schrodinger called the
"arithmetical paradox." We may then ask, "If we
do not each have separate alayas, why do we have
separate, individual memories?"
   Can we say that one child learns his lesson and
another knows it by heart? Waves break on the
water's surface, and although they cannot exist
apart from the water, they have their own form
and their own place. Many streams may flow into a
river, but all of them are one with the river. On
the surface of the sea of phenomena, we see many
waves glistening, but for each wave to be formed,
for each to be destroyed, it must be dependent on
every other wave. The memories of each of us are
not just our own personal treasures. They are liv-
ing realities that are related to all other living
realities. They undergo ceaseless transformation, as
do our bodies. Each thing is reality, but reality is
not subject to ideas of "one" or "many."
  Let the Sun of Awareness Shine on the Dharmakaya
These teachings from the Vijftanavada school are
given to us to help our meditation practice, not as


                    CUTIING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 109
Descriptions of Reality. We should not forget that
the phenomena which we call the sixth and
seventh consciousnesses, reality-in-itself, repre-
sentations of reality, do not exist independently of
one another or of space-time. A representation of
an object which appears in a dream is also a living
reality in which the whole universe is present. We
often think that an image of a fairy in a dream has
no reality since it is without material basis, but
what about the images on our TV screens? Are
they real? Can we grasp their substance or find
their material basis? Still, they are real. The entire
universe is present in them. The presence of an il-
lusion includes everything in the universe. The
illusion can exist only because everything else ex-
ists. Its existence has the same marvelous nature as
a particle. In modern science, a particle is no longer
seen as solid or concretely defined.
   When the sixth vijnana, mind-consciousness,
remains in deep concentration, it does not create
illusory objects. At such times, a living and direct
experience of ultimate reality is possible. To be
conscious always means to be conscious of some-
thing. Therefore we should not think that we can
bring our consciousness to a "pure" state in which
there are no objects. A consciousness without an
object is a consciousness which is not manifested.
It is latent in the alaya, just as a wave is latent in
calm water. There is a state of concentration which
can be attained during meditation, called
"concentration without perception," in which


110   THE SUN MY HEART
consciousness is no longer active. In dreamless
sleep, consciousness also remains in this latent
state in the alaya.
   During meditation, we focus all our attention
on one object, and concentration can arise. This
meditation is not passive or dull; in fact we must
be very alert. We maintain concentration on the
object, which is the mind itself, just as the sun
continues to shine on freshly fallen snow or veg-
etation. We can also synchronize our breathing
with our attention to the object, and this may im-
prove our concentration. If we use a leaf as the ob-
ject of our concentration, we can see, through the
leaf, the perfect oneness of mind and universe. If
we meditate on the presence of the sun throughout
our body, we can experience that Dharmakaya has
no beginning and no end. Meditating on inter-
being and interpenetration of reality is a means to
destroy concepts, and using such means, we can
arrive at a direct experience of ultimate reality in
mind and body simultaneously. In the Vijfi.ana-
vada school, this is called vijiiaptimatrata.
           From Interdependence (Paratantra)
              to Perfect Reality (Nispaiiiia)
The practice of meditation on the three-fold nature
of things (tri-svabhava) is similar to meditation on
the principle of multi-interorigin. In both cases, we
begin by meditating on the interdependent
relationship of all things (paratantra) in order to


                   CUTTING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 111
realize that the image of reality we have in our
mind is erroneous because it is built within the
framework of birth/death, one/many, space/time,
and other concepts, i.e. it is based on illusion. By
looking deeply into reality in the light of interde-
pendence, we gradually free ourselves from the net
of clinging to "myself" as a separate self and all
dharmas as separate "own-beings." Even if in the
alaya many deep roots of illusion (anusaya) still ex-
ist, they can be uprooted and destroyed, and perfect
liberation achieved each moment which is fully
lived in the light of interdependence. Just as the
raft is no longer needed after we reach the other
shore, when we live in the present moment in
harmony with all beings, we do not need the con-
cept of interdependence. We can dwell peacefully
in the true nature of consciousness. This is called
ultimate reality. It is the world of suchness
(tathata), the world of perfect oneness of mind and
object.
        Conditioned Reality and Ultimate Reality
                  Cannot Be Separated
There is no need for us to attain the world of
such ness, because suchness is available at all times.
The Avatamsaka Sutra calls it the "Dharma Realm of
Truth," the world of true nature. The world of
mountains and rivers, plants and animals, where
each thing seems to have its own place, is called


112    THE SUN MY HEART
the "Dharma Realm of Phenomena." But these
two worlds are not separate. They are one, exactly
like water and waves. That is why they are also re-
ferred to as the "Dharma Realm of Unobstructed
Interpenetration of Truth and Phenomena." Inter-
penetration in this world of phenomena, where
one phenomenon is all phenomena and where all
are one is called the "Dharma Realm of Unob-
structed Interpenetration of Every Phenomenon."
These are called the Four Dharma Realms, men-
tioned frequently in the Avatamsaka Sutra. Zen
Master Fa Cang of Tang Dynasty China, one of the
great scholars in this field wrote a text which de-
scribes the methods of meditation which can help
us destroy wrong views and return to the source,
prior to their origination, which means having a
clear, perfect view of the world of suchness. 28
   David Bohm has expounded a theory on what
he calls "the implicate order and the explicate or-
der," which is very close to the notion of the
Dharma Realm of the Unobstructed Interpenetra-
tion of All Phenomena. Bohm has said that all re-
alities which are thought to exist independently of
one another belong to the explicate order, an order
in which one thing seems to exist outside of an-
other. However, if we see deeply, everything is
linked to everything else in the whole universe,
and from one particle we can see the whole uni-
verse, which is included in it and out of which it is
created. This leads us to the world of the implicate
order in which "time and space no longer decide


                   CUTIING THE NET OF BIRTH AND DEATH 113
whether things are dependent on or independent
of one another." According to Bohm, present day
science must start from the wholeness of the im-
plicate order to be able to see the real nature of each
phenomenon. At a conference in Cordoba, he said,
"The electron is always the whole."29 This view is
very close to the "one in the all" of the Avatamsaka
Sutra. If Bohm is willing to go even further in his
research and practice meditation which involves
both mind and body, he may well arrive at some
unexpected result and cause a major breakthrough
in physics.




           CHAPTER               F  I V  E
      Look Deeply at Your Hand
        Happiness Arises from Awareness of Being
T he   sky was clear and it was quite warm this
morning. Little Thuy left for school after eating the
fried rice I made for her, and I went into the garden
to transplant some lettuce. When I came in to
wash my hands, I saw that my guest was already
awake and washing his face. I boiled water and
made a pot of tea. With two cups on the table in
the courtyard, I sat and waited for him to come
outside.
   We drank tea in the warm sunshine. My friend
asked me how we can see the results of meditation,
and I told him that peace and happiness are the
guides for measuring the fruit of practice. If we do
not become calmer and happier, something is
wrong with our practice.
   Sometimes people say that without a teacher,
meditation can cause confusion and imbalance, but
                                                   115


116    THE SUN MY HEART
it is not always possible to find a highly developed
teacher. Such people are rare, although it is often
possible to find teachers who have not yet fully
realized the Way. If you are not able to study with a
realized teacher, the most intelligent way to prac-
tice is to rely primarily on the teacher in yourself.
    Proceed slowly and carefully. For example, it is
not necessary to practice the Four Formless
Meditations. Never force your body or your mind.
Be kind to yourself. Live your daily life simply,
with awareness. If you are mindful, you have ev-
erything; you are everything! Please have a look at
The Miracle of Mindfulness and The Sutra on the Full
Awareness of Breathing. They are filled with practical
suggestions concerning the practice. Read the sec-
tions on the Four Dharma Realms, the Eight Con-
sciousnesses, and the Three Natures. Reading
books with practical suggestions are useful not just
before practicing sitting meditation but anytime. A
minute of meditation is a minute of peace and
happiness. If meditation is not pleasant for you,
you are not practicing correctly.
    Meditation brings happiness. This happiness
comes, first of all, from the fact that you are master
of yourself, no longer caught up in forgetfulness. If
you follow your breathing and allow a half-smile
to blossom, mindful of your feelings and thoughts,
the movements of your body will naturally become
more gentle and relaxed, harmony will be there,
and true happiness will arise. Keeping our mind
present in each moment is the foundation of med-


                            LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 117
itation practice. When we achieve this, we live our
lives fully and deeply, seeing things that others, in
forgetfulness, do not.
Providing Conditions Conducive to Living in Mindfulness
In The Miracle of Mindfulness, I proposed more than
30 exercises of mindfulness, including a suggestion
for how to arrange one day of mindfulness each
week. If you read it, you will see clear instructions.
This book has been translated into 35 languages. It
is a small book, but it is very practical and easy to
read. In fact, I still follow its instruction myself.
You can read it many times, because each time you
read it you will have a chance to examine your
own practice and from your own experience
discover things not in the book. More than ten
years have passed since it was published, and I still
receive many letters from readers all over the
world expressing their gratitude, telling how this
book has brought great changes in their lives. A
surgeon in New York told me that he always
maintains mindfulness while performing opera-
tions. (I think to myself that this surgeon will
never forget his surgical instruments in his pa-
tients' bodies.)
   The first few months of your practice may lack
                                    'I;'
continuity, since it is natural to forget to practice
mindfulness sometimes. But you can always start
again. If you have a practicing companion, you are


118   THE SUN MY HEART
very lucky. Friends who practice together often
remind each other to practice mindfulness, and
they can share experiences and progress. Mindful-
ness can be nurtured in you by many different
means. An autumn leaf that you pick up in your
backyard can be taped to your bathroom mirror,
and every morning when you see it, the leaf will
remind you to smile and return to mindfulness.
While you wash your face and brush your teeth,
you will be relaxed and in mindfulness. A bell
from a nearby church or clock-tower, or even the
telephone can also bring you back to mindfulness. I
recommend you let the phone ring two or three
times before answering, while you breathe in and
out and take the time to return to your true self.
               My Love, Who Are You?
Some day, if you need a topic for meditation,
choose one that you care about, one that you find
very interesting, so that it will command your at-
tention. It can be the sun, a caterpillar, a dew drop,
time, your face and your eyes before you were born.
Every phenomenon, concrete or abstract, physical,
physiological, psychological, or metaphysical, can
be the subject of your meditation. After you choose
a topic, plant it in the depths of your spiritual life.
An egg needs to be incubated by its mother hen in
order to become a baby chick. In the same way, the
topic you sow must be nurtured. Your "self," or the


                            LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 119
"self" of the person you like the most, or the "self"
of the person you hate the most can be the subject
of your practice. Any subject can bring about awak-
ening if it is sown deeply into the ground of your
being. But if it is only entrusted to your intellect, it
is unlikely to bear fruit.
   Have you meditated on the subject "Who am n"
Who were you before you were born? At the time
when there was not the slightest trace of your
physical existence, did you exist or not? How can
you become something from nothing? If on the
day I was conceived my parents had other ap-
pointments and were not able to see each other,
then who am I now? If that day the egg of my
mother was not penetrated by that sperm of my fa-
ther, but by another sperm of his, then who am I
now? Would I be a brother or a sister of mine? If
that day, my mother did not marry my father or
my father did not marry my mother, but married
someone else, then who am I today? Each healthy
living cell in your body controls its own activity,
but does this mean that each cell has its own self?
In the biological classification system, species make
up smaller subdivisions of genus. Does each
species represent a "self?" If such questions are
asked with your deepest conviction and intelli-
gence, and if you plant them deeply into your spir-
ituallife with your whole being, one day an unex-
pected discovery will arise.
   Have you ever looked into the eyes of your
loved one and asked deeply, "Who are you, my


120   THE SUN MY HEART
love?" For either of you to answer, you cannot be
satisfied by the usual responses. "My love, who are
you who comes to me and takes my suffering as
your suffering, my happiness as your happiness,
my life and death as your life and death? Who are
you whose 'self' has become my 'self?' My love,
why aren't you a dew drop, a butterfly, a bird, a
pine tree?" Don't be satisfied with mere poetic im-
ages. You must ask and answer these questions
with your whole mind and heart, with your whole
being. Some day, you will even have to question
the person you hate the most in this same way:
"Who are you who brings me such pain, who
makes me feel so much anger and hatred? Are you
part of the chain of cause and effect, the fire which
forges me on the path?" In other words, "Are you
me myself?" You have to become that person. You
have to be one with him or her, to worry about
what he or she worries about, to suffer his or her
suffering, to appreciate what he or she appreciates.
That person and you cannot be "two." Your "self"
cannot be separate from their self. You are that
person, the same as you are your love, and the
same as you are yourself.
   Continue practicing until you see yourself in the
most cruel and inhumane political leader, in the
most devastatingly tortured prisoner, in the
wealthiest man, and in the child starving, all skin
and bones. Practice until you recognize your pres-
ence in everyone else on the bus, in the subway, in
the concentration camp, working in the fields, in a


                              LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 121
leaf, in a caterpillar, in a dew drop, in a ray of sun-
shine. Meditate until you see yourself in a speck of
dust and in the most distant galaxy.
                Standard for Orientation
As you continue practicing, the flower of insight
will blossom in you, along with the flowers of
compassion, tolerance, happiness, and letting go.
You can let go, because you do not need to keep
anything for yourself. You are no longer a fragile
and small "self" that needs to be preserved by all
possible means. Since the happiness of others is
also your happiness, you are now filled with joy,
and you have no jealousy or selfishness. Free from
attachment to wrong views and prejudices, you are
filled with tolerance. The door of your compassion
is wide open, and you also suffer the sufferings of
all living beings. As a result, you do whatever you
can to relieve these sufferings. These four virtues
are called the Four Immeasurables: lovingkind-
ness, compassion, sympathetic joy, and non-at-
tachment. They are the fruits of the meditation on
the principle of the interdependent co-arising of
things. The development of these Four Im-
measurables in you shows that you are proceeding
in the right direction and are also capable of
guiding others in their practice.


122    THE SUN MY HEART
                       A Love Letter
Where are you now, my good friend? Are you out
in the field, in the forest, on the mountain, in a
military camp, in a factory, at your desk, in a hos-
pital, in prison? Regardless of where you are, let us
breathe in and out together, and let the Sun of
Awareness enter. Let us begin with this breath and
this awareness. Whether life is an illusion, a
dream, or a wondrous reality depends on our in-
sight and our mindfulness. Awakening is a mira-
cle. The darkness in a totally dark room will disap-
pear the moment the light is switched on. In the
same way, life will reveal itself as a miraculous re-
ality the second the Sun of Awareness begins to
shine.
   I have a poet friend who was put into a "re-ed-
ucation" camp in Vietnam, in a remote jungle
area. During his four years there, he practiced
meditation and was able to live in peace. Upon re-
lease, he was lucid, like a sharp sword. He knew
that he had not lost anything during those four
years. On the contrary, he knew he had "re-edu-
cated" himself in meditation.
   As I write these lines, I am writing a love letter. I
hope these words will be read by you, my known
and unknown brothers and sisters, who are living
in circumstances regarded as hopeless and tragic,
that you may renew your energies and courage.


                           LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 123
  If You Want Peace, Peace is With You Immediately
Fifteen years ago, I wrote four Chinese characters
on a paper lamp shade. These four characters can
be translated as, "If you want peace, peace is with
you immediately." A few years later, in Singapore,
I had the chance to practice these words.
   Several of us organized a program to help the
Indochinese refugees in the Gulf of Siam. The pro-
gram was called Mau Chay Ruot Mem ("When
blood is shed, we all suffer"). At that time, the
world did not know about the "boat people," and
the governments of Thailand, Malaysia, and Sin-
gapore would not allow them to land. So we hired
two large ships, the Leapdal and the Roland, to pick
up refugees on the open sea, and two small ships,
the Saigon 200 and the Blackmark, to communicate
between them and to transport food and supplies.
We planned to fill the two large ships with
refugees and take them to Australia and Guam.
We had to do our work secretly, since the situation
of the boat people was something most of the
world's governments did not want to acknowledge
at that time, and we knew they would give us a
hard time if they found out.
   Unfortunately, after nearly 800 refugees had
been rescued from small boats at sea, the govern-
ment of Singapore discovered our program. At 2:00
one morning, the Singapore police were ordered to
surround the house where I was staying. One offi-
cer blocked the front and another the back, while


124    THE SUN MY HEART
four others rushed in and confiscated my travel
documents. They ordered me to leave the country
within 24 hours.
   With 800 people aboard our two large ships, we
had to find a way for them to travel safely to Aus-
tralia or Guam. The Saigon 200 and the Blackmark
were not allowed to leave port to take food and
water to the refugees on the Leapdal and the
Roland. The Roland had enough fuel to reach
Australia if we could get food to them. Then its
engine broke down. The day was very windy and
the sea quite rough, and we worried about the
ship's safety, even drifting off shore, but the
Malaysian government would not allow it to enter
Malaysian water. I tried to get permission to enter a
neighboring country, to continue the rescue oper-
ation, but the governments of Thailand, Malaysia,
and Indonesia would not grant me an entry visa.
Even though I was on land, I found myself drifting
on the sea and my life was one with the lives of the
800 refugees on board.
   In that situation, I decided that I must practice
the meditation topic: "If you want peace, peace is
with you immediately," and I was surprised to find
myself quite calm, not afraid or worried about any-
thing. I was not just careless-this was truly a
peaceful state of mind. And in that state of mind, I
was able to overcome this difficult situation. As
long as I live, I will never forget those seconds of
sitting meditation, those breaths, those mindful
footsteps during that 24-hour period.


                             LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 125
   There were more problems than it seemed pos-
sible to solve in just 24 hours. Even in a whole
lifetime, many of us complain that there is not
enough time. How could so much be done in a
mere 24 hours? Success came when I faced the
problem directly. I vowed that if I could not have
peace at that moment, I would never be able to
have peace. If I could not be peaceful in the midst
of danger, then the kind of peace I might have in
simpler times would not mean anything. Without
finding peace in the midst of difficulty, I would
never know real peace. Practicing this topic, "If you
want peace, peace is with you immediately," I was
able to resolve many problems, one after another,
when that was what was needed.
          Effect Follows Cause More Quickly
                than a Bolt of Lightning
Peace can exist only in the present moment. It is
ridiculous to say, "Wait until I finish this, then I
will be free to live in peace." What is "this?" A
diploma, a job, a house, the payment of a debt? If
you think that way, peace will never come. There
is always another "this" that will follow the pre-
sent one. If you are not living in peace at this mo-
ment, you will never be able to. If you truly want to
be at peace, you must be at peace right now. Other-
wise, there is only "the hope of peace some day."


126   THE SUN MY HEART
   My poet-friend did not wait to be released from
the re-education camp to live in peace. He did not
know that he would only be there four years.
(Many stay ten years or longer.) He practiced medi-
tation on a topic similar to, "If you want peace,
peace is with you immediately." We need to sit
down and find a method of practice that works for
us so we can live in peace and happiness. Peace
does not come only after many long days of prac-
tice. What is most important is your wish, your
determination. If your determination is strong, the
effect will follow the cause more quickly than a bolt
of lightning. You can nurture peace through your
breathing, your footsteps, or your smile, through
seeing, hearing, or feeling, until you are one with
peace.
           Everything Depends on Your Peace
If the earth were your body, you could feel the
many areas where there is suffering. War, sup-
pression, and famine wreak destruction in so many
places. Many children have become blind from
malnutrition. Their hands search through mounds
of trash for things they can trade for a few ounces
of food. Many adults are dying slowly and
hopelessly in prisons. Others are killed for trying to
oppose the violence. We have enough nuclear
weapons to destroy dozens of Earths, but we con-
tinue to manufacture more.


                            LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 127
    Aware of all of this, how can we withdraw to a
forest or even to our own rooms to sit in medita-
tion? The peace we seek cannot be our personal
possession. We need to find an inner peace which
makes it possible for us to become one with those
who suffer, and to do something to help our
brothers and sisters, which is to say, ourselves. I
know many young people who are aware of the
real situation of the world and who are filled with
compassion. They refuse to hide themselves in ar-
tificial peace, and they engage in the world in order
to change the society. They know what they want,
yet after a period of involvement they become dis-
couraged. Why? It is because they lack deep, inner
peace, the kind of peace they can take with them
into their life of action. Our strength is not in
weapons, money, or power. Our strength is in our
peace, the peace within us. This peace makes us
indestructible. We must have peace while taking
care of those we love and those we want to protect.
    I have recognized this peace in many, many
people. Most of their time and effort is spent pro-
tecting the weak, watering the trees of love and
understanding everywhere. They belong to various
religious and cultural backgrounds. I do not know
how each of them came to their inner peace, but I
have seen it in them. If you are attentive, I am sure
you will see it too. This peace is not a barricade
which separates you from the world. On the con-
trary, this kind of peace brings you into the world
and empowers you to undertake whatever you


128    THE SUN MY HEART
want to do to try to help-struggling for social jus-
tice, lessening the disparity between the rich and
the poor, stopping the arms race, fighting against
discrimination, and sowing more seeds of under-
standing, reconciliation, and compassion. In any
struggle, you need determination and patience.
This determination will dissipate if you lack peace.
Those who lead a life of social action especially
need to practice mindfulness during each moment
of daily life.
            A Bodhisattva Looks at All Beings
               with the Eyes of Compassion
Peace and compassion go hand in hand with un-
derstanding and non-discrimination. We choose
one thing over another when we discriminate.
With the eyes of compassion, we can look at all of
living reality at once. A compassionate person sees
himself or herself in every being. With the ability
to view reality from many viewpoints, we can
overcome all viewpoints and act compassionately
in each situation. This is the highest meaning of
the word "reconciliation."
   Reconciliation does not mean to sign an agree-
ment with duplicity and cruelty. Reconciliation
opposes all forms of ambition, without taking
sides. Most of us want to take sides in each en-
counter or conflict. We distinguish right from
wrong based on partial evidence gathered directly


                           LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 129
or by propaganda or hearsay. We need indignation
in order to act, but indignation alone is not
enough, even righteous, legitimate indignation.
Our world does not lack people willing to throw
themselves into action. What we need are people
who are capable of loving, of not taking sides so
that they can embrace the whole of reality as a
mother hen embraces all her chicks, with two fully
spread wings.
   The practice of meditation on interdependent
co-arising is one way to arrive at this realization.
When it is attained, discrimination vanishes and
reality is no longer sliced by the sword of
conceptualization. The boundaries between good
and evil are obliterated, and means and ends are
recognized as the same. We have to continue prac-
ticing until we can see a child's body of skin and
bones in Uganda or Ethiopia as our own, until the
hunger and pain in the bodies of all living species
are our own. Then we will have realized non-dis-
crimination, real love. According to the Lotus Sutra,
looking at all living beings with the eyes of com-
passion is a capacity of Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva.
When we see someone who can look at all beings
with the eyes of compassion, we know that Ava-
lokitesvara Bodhisattva is present in them. When
we meditate on the First Noble Truth, the truth of
suffering, Avalokitesvara Bodhisattva is present in
us. When we ask a favor of Avalokitesvara Bod-
hisattva, he appears even before we ask.


130    THE SUN MY HEART
            "Look into Your Hand, My Child"
I have a friend who is an artist. He has been away
from home for nearly 40 years. He told me that ev-
ery time he misses his mother, all he has to do is
look at his hand and he feels better. His mother, a
traditional Vietnamese woman, could read only a
few Chinese characters and has never studied
Western philosophy or science. Before he left
Vietnam, she held his hand and told him,
"Whenever you miss me, look into your hand my
child. You will see me immediately." How pene-
trating these simple, sincere words! For nearly 40
years, he has looked into his hand many times.
   The presence of his mother is not just genetic.
Her spirit, her hopes, and her life are also present
in him. I know that my friend practices meditation,
but I do not know whether he has chosen the sub-
ject, "Looking into your Hand" as a kung-an. This
subject can take him far in his practice. From his
hand, he can penetrate deeply into the reality of
beginningless and endless time. He will be able to
see that thousands of generations before him and
thousands of generations after him are all him.
From time immemorial until the present mo-
ment, his life has never been interrupted and his
hand is still there, a beginningless and endless re-
ality. He can recognize his "true face" 500 million
years ago and 500 million years from now. He ex-
ists not only in the evolutionary tree branching
along the axis of time, but also in the network of


                            LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 131
interdependent relations. As a result, each cell in
his body is just as free from birth and death as he is.
In this case, the subject "Looking into your Hand"
can produce a deeper effect than the subject "The
Sound of One Hand" proposed by Zen Master
Hakuin.
   When my niece came to visit me from America
last summer, I gave her "Looking into your Hand"
as a Zen subject for her to cherish. I told her that
every pebble, every leaf, every caterpillar on the
hill by the hermitage is present in her hand.
              "Why Do You Cry, Sister?"
A few years ago, a pro-government group in Ho
Chi Minh City spread a rumor that I had passed
away from a heart attack. This news caused much
confusion inside the country. A Buddhist nun
wrote me that the news arrived at her community
while she was teaching a class of novices, and the
atmosphere in the class sank and one nun passed
out. I have been in exile for more than 20 years be-
cause of my involvement in the peace movement,
and I do not know this young nun or the present
generation of Buddhist monks and nuns in Viet-
nam. But life and death is only a fiction, and not
very deep; why do you cry, sister? You are studying
Buddhism, doing what I am doing. So if you exist, I
also exist. What does not exist cannot come into
existence and what exists cannot cease to be. Have


132    THE SUN MY HEART
you realized that, sister? If we cannot bring a speck
of dust from "existence" to "non-existence," how
can we do that to a human? On earth, many people
have been killed struggling for peace, for human
rights, for freedom and social justice, but no one
can destroy them. They still exist. Sister, do you
think that Jesus Christ, Mahatma Gandhi, Lam-
brakis, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. are "dead peo-
ple?" No, they are still here. We are they. We carry
them in each cell of our bodies. If you ever hear
such news again, please smile. Your serene smile
will prove that you have attained great under-
standing and courage. Buddhism and all of hu-
mankind expect this of you.
                All is in the Word "Know"
A friend of mine who is a research scientist is now
guiding many Ph.D. candidates on their theses. He
wants to do everything in a scientific way, but he is
also a poet and as a result he often is not very "sci-
entific." Last winter, he went through a tremen-
dous spiritual crisis. Hearing of this, I sent him a
drawing of a wave riding on silky-smooth water.
Beneath the drawing I wrote, "As always, the wave
lives the life of a wave, and at the same time, the
life of water. When you breathe, you breathe for all
of us."
    As I wrote that sentence, I swam with him to
help him get across that time of difficulty, and


                           LOOK DEEPLY AT YOUR HAND 133
fortunately, it helped us both. Most people view
themselves as waves and forget that they are also
water. They are used to living in birth-and-death,
and they forget about no-birth-and-no-death. A
wave also lives the life of water, and we also live
the life of no-birth-no-death. We only need to
know that we are living the life of no-birth-no-
death. All is in the word "know." To know is to
realize. Realization is mindfulness. All the work of
meditation is aimed at awakening us in order to
know one and only one thing: birth and death can
never touch us in any way whatsoever.




                             Notes
          Chapter One, Sunshine and Green Leaves
1 "Prajiia," from Thich Nhat Hanh, Footprints on the Sand (San
Jose: La Boi Press).
2 In the teaching of Vijiianavada, smrti is accompanied by
samadhi and prajfia, and forgetfulness is accompanied by
dispersion and wrong views. Dispersion and wrong views are
the opposites of samadhi and prajfia. Smrti, samadhi, and prajfia
are three among the five wholesome mental formations.
Forgetfulness, dispersion, and wrong views are three among
the 26 unwholesome mental formations.
3 Fritjof Capra, The Tao of Physics: An Exploration of the Parallels
Between Modern Physics and Eastern Mysticism (Boston: Sham-
bhala New Science Library, Second Edition, 1985). See also
Thomas Cleary, trans., The Flower Ornament Scripture: A Trans-
lation of the Avatamsaka Sutra, 3 volumes (Boston: Shambhala,
1984-87).
4 See, e.g., Dogen, Moon in a Dewdrop, ed. by Kazuaki Tana-
hashi (Berkeley: North Point, 1985), p. 314.
5 Although in the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum
theory, observer and observed are inseparable, most scientists
do not practice this preaching.
6 See Nyanaponika Thera, The Heart of Buddhist Meditation
(New York: Weiser, 1962).
7 "The terms objective and subjective only designate limited
events. Through quantum mechanics we know that no totally
objective phenomenon can exist, that is to say, independent
of the observer's mind. Correlatively, all subjective phenom-
                                                                135


136     THE SUN MY HEART
ena present an objective fact." Brian D. Josephson, Science et
Conscience (Paris: Stock, 1980).
            Chapter Two, The Dance of the Bees
8 K. von Frisch, Tanzsprache und Orientierung der Bienen (Berlin,
1965).
9 See David Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980), chapter 2, on the "rheo-
mode."
10 Alphonse de Lamartine, Meditations poetiques (1820).
11 Alaya, the 8th consciousness, has the function of "main-
taining" the maintainer, the object that is maintained, and the
object taken as a self by the 7th consciousness, manyana.
Alaya also has the function of maintaining all seeds (bija), i.e.
the essence, or energy, of all things; as well as the function of
concocting, i.e. transforming and making ripe all karmas so
that new physical, psychological, and physiological phe-
nomena arise. Manyana is a psychological attempt to cling to
a part of Alaya as its self. Amala is pure white consciousness-
the name of Alaya after it is freed from manyana. All of this is
more fully explained in Chapter 4.
      Chapter Three, The Universe in a Speck of Dust
12 Many believe that entering the Four Dhyanas and the Four
Formless States Samadhi is to enter a state where mind no
longer has its object. In fact, mind always has an object-if
not, it is not mind. In the Four Formless States, the object of
the mind is limitless space, limitless consciousness, the ab-
sence of perception, and the state of neither perception nor
non-perception. Samadhi is a state of mind in which the dis-


                                                    NOTES     137
tinction of subject and object of consciousness no longer ex-
ists, i.e. the nimittabhaga (object) is not objectivized by the
darsanabhaga (subject). Both object and subject are parts of
consciousness, they cannot exist separately. They have the
same ground of being: the svabhavabhaga (the self-nature of
consciousness).
13 Dao Hanh, Dhyana Master, Ly Dynasty, end of the 11th
century.
14 Nguyen Cong Tru was born in 1778 in the Vietnamese vil-
lage of Uy Vieu, in Ha Tinh Province, and he died in 1859.
15 Walt Whitman, "Song of Myself." "Do I contradict my-
self? IVery well then, I contradict myself/I am large, I contain
multitudes."
16 "It is a question here, on the contrary, of pushing to the
limit the conception of particles as a network of related
interconnections. The philosophy of bootstrap renounces not
only the idea of elementary "building blocks" of matter, but
any fundamental entity of any kind: laws, equations or
principles. In it the universe is a dynamic tissue of
interdependent events. No property of any part of it has the
role of foundation; all is the result of the properties of the
other parts, and it is the global coherence of their mutual
relationships which determines the structure of the whole
tissue." Fritjof Capra, "The Tao of Physics," in Josephson, ed.,
Science et Conscience (Paris, 1980), op. cit.
17 vikalpa.
18 David Bohm, "Imagination and the Implicate Order," in
Josephson, op. cit., p. 453.
19 Edwin Schrodinger, My View of the World (London: Cam-
bridge University Press, 1964), p. 22.
20 The terms endless (vo ang) and infinite (vo tan) are in single
quotes because I am using them provisionally.


138     THE SUN MY HEART
21 Those of you who are not familiar with the Theory of Rela-
tivity may not understand the notion of the "four-dimensional
continuum." Before Einstein, the German mathematician
Minkowski had already said that time and space separated
from each other are fictitious ghosts; only when together can
they represent reality. The Theory of Relativity says that all
moving things (all pieces of rock on earth are moving together
with Earth also) can only assert themselves in time and space
at the same time. For example, if a plane takes off from Paris
to go to New Delhi, the flight controller on the ground not
only has to know the longitude x, the latitude y, and the al-
titude Z, but he also has to know the time t in order to know
the exact position of the plane throughout the flight. Time t is
thus the fourth dimension.
    Time, space, mass, and movement exist in interrelation-
ship with each other, and the greater the density of the mass,
the more curved the space surrounding that mass will be.
Light emitted from celestial bodies, when passing by huge
masses like the sun, will follow a curved line, because in the
vicinity of the sun, space is more curved. Light and energy
also have masses, because matter and energy are one, ac-
cording to the famous formula e=mc 2, in which e is energy, m is
mass, and c is the speed of light. The presence of matter
brings about the curved nature of space; therefore in relativ-
ity, the absolute straight line of Euclidian mathematics is no
longer possible.
    Chapter Four, Cutting the Net of Birth and Death
22 Alfred Kastler, Cette etrange matiere (Paris: Stock, 1976).
23 Anuradha Sutra, (Samyutta Nikaya, XLIV, 2).
24 J. Robert Oppenheimer, Science and the Common
Understanding (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1954), p. 40.


                                                      NOTES    139
25 Literally, "Death, if anyone sees to the depth, is called a
hero." See Isshu Miura and Ruth Fuller Sasaki, The Zen Koan
(New York: Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1965).
26 Erwin Schrodinger, What is Life? & Mind and Matter, (Lon-
don: Cambridge University Press, 1967), pp. 138 ff.
27 Interestingly, in the latest unification theories, superstrings
are supposed to give rise to space and time themselves.
28 Fa Cang, Wang lin Hai Yuan Guan ("Ending Illusions and
Going Back to Your Own Source"), no. 1876, Revised Chinese
Tripitaka.
29 David Bohm, Wholeness and the Implicate Order (London:
Routledge & Kegan Paul, 1980).




ANGER

              Going Home
     Living Buddha, Living Christ
           Be Still and Know
         Fragrant Palm Leaves
              Being Peace
       The Blooming of a Lotus
         Breathe! You Are Alive
     Call Me by My True Names:
The Collected Poems of Thich Nhat Hanh
     Cultivating the Mind of Love
      For a Future to Be Possible
     The Heart of Understanding
     The Long Road Turns to Joy
             Love in Action
      The Miracle of Mindfulness
        Old Path White Clouds
          Peace Is Every Step
  Present Moment Wonderful Moment
          The Sun My Heart
           Teachings on Love
             Touching Peace
     Transformation and Healing


 ANGER
Wisdom for Cooling the Flames
 T H I C H N H AT H A N H
          RIVERHEAD BOOKS
      a member of Penguin Putnam Inc.
            New York     2001


Riverhead Books
a member of
Penguin Putnam Inc.,
375 Hudson Street,
New York, NY 10014, U.S.A.
Copyright © 2001 by Thich Nhat Hanh
All rights reserved. This book, or parts thereof, may not
be reproduced in any form without permission.
ISBN 0 7865 1788 3
First edition (electronic): November 2001
Making or distributing electronic copies of this book constitutes copyright
infringement and could subject the infringer to criminal and civil liability.


ction                                               1
CONSUMING ANGER                                    13
PUTTING OUT THE FIRE OF ANGER                      23
  T H E L A N G U A G E O F T R U E LO V E         47
 T R A N S F O R M AT I O N                        67
C O M P A S S I O N AT E C O M M U N I C AT I O N  89
YO U R H E A RT S U T R A                         109
  NO ENEMIES                                      125


  EMBRACING ANGER WITH
  MINDFULNESS                            161
M I N D F U L B R E AT H I N G           177
   R E STO R I N G T H E P U R E L A N D 189
ix A: Peace Treaty                       205
ix B: The Five Mindfulness Trainings     209
ix C: Guided Meditations for Looking
 ply and Releasing Anger                 213
ix D: Deep Relaxation                    221


     T he Practice of Happiness
 appy, to me, is to suffer less. If we were not capable
sforming the pain within ourselves, happiness would
possible.
ny people look for happiness outside themselves, but
 ppiness must come from inside of us. Our culture
 that happiness comes from having a lot of money, a
power, and a high position in society. But if you ob-
 refully, you will see that many rich and famous peo-
not happy. Many of them commit suicide.
e Buddha and the monks and nuns of his time did not
ything except their three robes and one bowl. But they
                         1


cording to the Buddha’s teachings, the most basic con-
for happiness is freedom. Here we do not mean polit-
 edom, but freedom from the mental formations of
despair, jealousy, and delusion. These mental forma-
 re described by the Buddha as poisons. As long as
  oisons are still in our heart, happiness cannot be
 e.
 order to be free from anger, we have to practice,
 r we are Christian, Muslim, Buddhist, Hindu, or Jew-
  cannot ask the Buddha, Jesus, God, or Mohammed to
 ger out of our hearts for us. There are concrete in-
ons on how to transform the craving, anger, and con-
within us. If we follow these instructions and learn to
  od care of our suffering, we can help others do the
   Making a Change for the Better
se there is a family in which the father and son are
with each other. They are not capable of communicat-
 more. The father suffers a lot and also the son. They
                        2


 ood teaching is the kind of teaching that you can
irectly to your life, so that you can transform your suf-
When you are angry, you suffer as though you are
urned by the fires of hell. When you feel great despair
 usy, you are in hell. You have to go to a friend who
es, and ask how to practice in order to transform the
 he despair in you.
       Compassionate Listening
            Relieves Suffering
a person’s speech is full of anger, it is because he or she
deeply. Because he has so much suffering, he becomes
bitterness. He is always ready to complain and blame
for his problems. This is why you find it very un-
t to listen to him and try to avoid him.
 understand and transform anger, we must learn the
e of compassionate listening and using loving speech.
 is a Bodhisattva—a Great Being or an Awakened
—who is capable of listening very deeply with a lot of
 sion. She is called Kwan Yin or Avalokiteshvara, the
                          3


ery concrete guidance to those who come seeking for
  order to restore communication.
tening with compassion can help the other person to
 ess. Yet, even if you have the best intentions, you can-
 en deeply unless you train yourself in the art of com-
  ate listening. If you can sit down quietly and listen
ssionately to that person for one hour, you can relieve
  his suffering. Listen with only one purpose: to allow
 er person to express himself and find relief from his
ng. Keep compassion alive during the whole time of
  g.
u have to be very concentrated while you listen. You
  focus on the practice of listening with all your atten-
our whole being: your eyes, ears, body, and your mind.
just pretend to listen, and do not listen with one hun-
ercent of yourself, the other person will know it and
 t find relief from his suffering. If you know how to
e mindful breathing and can stay focused on the desire
  him find relief, then you will be able to sustain your
ssion while listening.
mpassionate listening is a very deep practice. You lis-
  to judge or to blame. You listen just because you want
                         4


 he other person can really help her to transform her
nd suffering.
       A Bomb Ready to Explode
 a Catholic woman who lives in North America. She
d very much because she and her husband had a very
t relationship. They were a well-educated family; they
ad doctorate degrees. Yet the husband suffered so
He was at war with his wife and all of his children. He
 ot talk to his wife or to his children. Everyone in the
tried to avoid him, because he was like a bomb ready
ode. His anger was enormous. He believed that his
d his children despised him, because no one wanted to
 ear him. In fact, his wife did not despise him. His
n did not despise him. They were afraid of him. To be
o him was dangerous because he could explode at
 e.
e day the wife wanted to kill herself because she could
 r it any longer. She felt she was not able to continue
 nder these circumstances. But before she committed
                         5


had invited her several times to practice meditation in
o suffer less, but she had always refused. She explained
  a Catholic, she could not practice or follow Buddhist
 gs.
at afternoon, when the Buddhist woman learned that
end was going to kill herself, she said over the tele-
 “You claim to be my friend, and now you are about
The only thing I ask of you is to listen to the talk of
cher, but you refuse. If you are really my friend, then
 take a taxi and come listen to the tape, and after that
n die.”
hen the Catholic woman arrived, her friend let her sit
n the living room and listen to a dharma talk on restor-
mmunication. During the hour or hour and a half that
ened to the dharma talk, she went through a very deep
 rmation within herself. She found out many things.
 lized that she was partly responsible for her own suf-
 and that she had also made her husband suffer a lot.
 lized that she had not been able to help him at all. In
 e had made his suffering heavier and heavier each day
e she avoided him. She learned from the dharma talk
 order to help the other person, she should be able to
                         6


            Defusing the Bomb
 stening to the dharma talk, the woman felt very in-
She wanted to go home and practice deep listening in
   help her husband. But her Buddhist friend said, “No
nd, you should not do it today because compassion-
 ning is a very deep teaching. You have to train your-
 at least one or two weeks in order to be able to listen
odhisattva.” So the woman invited her Catholic friend
 d a retreat in order to learn more.
ere were four hundred and fifty people participating in
eat—eating, sleeping, and practicing together for six
 uring that time, all of us practiced mindful breathing,
 f our in-breath and out-breath to bring our body and
ogether. We practiced mindful walking, investing one
d percent of ourselves in each step. We practiced
l breathing, walking, and sitting in order to observe
brace the suffering within us.
t only did the participants listen to the dharma talks,
of us practiced the art of listening to each other, and
                         7


  practiced very seriously, very deeply, because for her,
 s a matter of life or death.
hen she returned home after the retreat, she was very
nd her heart was full of compassion. She really wanted
 her husband to remove the bomb within his heart. She
 very slowly and followed her breathing to keep calm
urish her compassion. She practiced walking mindfully,
r husband noticed that she was different. Finally, she
lose and sat quietly next to him, something that she
ver done in the last five years.
  was silent for a long time, maybe ten minutes. Then
  tly put her hand on his and said, “My dear, I know
ve suffered a lot during the last five years and I am very
  know that I am greatly responsible for your suffering.
  ly have I been unable to help you suffer less, but I have
he situation much worse. I have made many mistakes
used you a great deal of pain. I am extremely sorry. I
like you to give me a chance to begin anew. I want to
 ou happy, but I have not known how to do it; that is
have made the situation worse and worse every day. I
   ant to continue like this anymore. So my darling,
help me. I need your help in order to understand you
 in order to love you better. Please tell me what is in
                         8


  ast. Without you, I cannot do it. I need you to help
hat I will not continue to hurt you. I want only to love
  hen she spoke to him like this, he began to cry. He
ke a little boy.
 a long time, his wife had been very sour. She always
   and her speech had been full of anger, bitterness,
g, and judging. They had only argued with each other.
d not spoken to him like this in years, with so much
d tenderness. When she saw her husband crying, she
hat now she had a chance. The door of her hus-
heart had been closed, but now it was beginning to
gain. She knew that she had to be very careful, so
  tinued her practice of mindful breathing. She said,
  my dear, please tell me what is in your heart. I
  learn to do better so that I won’t continue to make
 s.”
e wife is also an intellectual, she has a Ph.D. degree like
band, but they suffered because neither of them knew
 practice listening to each other with compassion. But
 ht she was wonderful, she practiced compassionate lis-
 uccessfully. It turned out to be a very healing night for
  them. After only a few hours together, they were able
ncile with each other.
                          9


practice is correct, if the practice is good, you don’t
 ve or ten years, just a few hours may be enough to
 e transformation and healing. I know that the Catholic
  was very successful that night, because she was able to
ce her husband to sign up for a second retreat.
e second retreat lasted six days and at the end of the
 her husband also experienced a great transformation.
  a tea meditation, he introduced his wife to the
 etreatants. He said, “My dear friends, my dear co-
 oners, I would like to introduce to you a Bodhisattva,
  Being. She is my wife, a great Bodhisattva. During the
e years, I have made her suffer so much, I have been so
 But, through her practice, she has changed everything.
s saved my life.” After that they told their story and
ey came to the retreat. They shared how they were able
 ncile on a deep level and renew their love.
hen a farmer uses a kind of fertilizer that does not
  y effect, he has to change the fertilizer. The same is
r us. If, after several months, the practice we are doing
t brought about any transformation and healing, we
   reconsider the situation. We must change our ap-
                         10


 of us can do the same if we receive and learn the right
g and the right practice. If you practice very seriously,
make the practice a matter of life and death, like the
 c woman, you can change everything.
      M a k i n g H a p p i n e s s Po s s i b l e
  in a time of many sophisticated means of communi-
 Information can travel to the other side of the planet
ickly. But it is exactly at this time that communication
n people, father and son, husband and wife, mother
  ghter, has become extremely difficult. If we cannot re-
  mmunication, happiness will never be possible. In the
 st teaching, the practice of compassionate listening,
ctice of loving speech, and the practice of taking care
 anger are presented very clearly. We have to put into
e the teaching of the Buddha, concerning deep listen-
  loving speech in order to restore communication and
 appiness to our family, our school, and our commu-
  en we can help other people in the world.
                         11




   ONSUMING ANGER
 need to know how to handle and take care of our
  o do this, we must pay more attention to the bio-
al aspect of anger, because anger has its roots in our
  well as our mind. When we analyze our anger, we can
  hysiological elements. We have to look deeply at how
 how we drink, how we consume, and how we handle
dy in our daily life.
        Anger Is Not Strictly a
          Psychological Reality
teaching of the Buddha, we learn that our body and
 e not separate. Our body is our mind, and, at the same
                       13


 nd we cannot separate them. In Buddhism we call the
mind formation namarupa. Namarupa is the psyche-
the mind-body as one entity. The same reality some-
 ppears as mind, and sometimes appears as body.
oking deeply into the nature of an elementary particle,
 ts have discovered that sometimes it manifests as a
 nd sometimes as a particle. A wave is quite different
 particle. A wave can be only a wave. It cannot be a par-
 particle can be only a particle, it cannot be a wave. But
ve and the particle are the same thing. So instead of
 it a wave or a particle, they call it a “wavicle,” com-
 the words wave and particle. This is the name scientists
ven the elementary particle.
e same thing is true with mind and body. Our dualis-
   tells us that mind cannot be body, and body cannot
d. But looking deeply, we see that body is mind, mind
. If we can overcome the duality that sees the mind and
s entirely separate, we come very close to the truth.
 ny people are beginning to realize that what happens
body also happens to the mind, and vice versa. Mod-
dicine is aware that the sickness of the body may be a
 f sickness in the mind. And sickness in our minds may
nected to sickness in our bodies. Body and mind are
                        14


 eat, the way we consume, is very important.
          We A r e W h a t We E a t
ger, our frustration, our despair, have much to do with
dy and the food we eat. We must work out a strategy
  g, of consuming to protect ourselves from anger and
e. Eating is an aspect of civilization. The way we grow
 d, the kind of food we eat, and the way we eat it has
o do with civilization because the choices we make can
bout peace and relieve suffering.
e food that we eat can play a very important role in our
Our food may contain anger. When we eat the flesh of
  al with mad cow disease, anger is there in the meat.
must also look at the other kinds of food that we eat.
we eat an egg or a chicken, we know that the egg or
  can also contain a lot of anger. We are eating anger,
 refore we express anger.
wadays, chickens are raised in large-scale modern farms
hey cannot walk, run, or seek food in the soil. They are
 ly by humans. They are kept in small cages and can-
ve at all. Day and night they have to stand. Imagine
                        15


mad. So the chickens become mad.
order for the chickens to produce more eggs, the farm-
 te artificial days and nights. They use indoor lighting
te a shorter day and a shorter night so that the chick-
ieve that twenty-four hours have passed, and then they
 e more eggs. There is a lot of anger, a lot of frustra-
nd much suffering in the chickens. They express their
nd frustration by attacking the chickens next to them.
  se their beaks to peck and wound each other. They
 ach other to bleed, to suffer, and to die. That is why
s now cut the beaks off all the chickens, to prevent
rom attacking each other out of frustration.
 when you eat the flesh or egg of such a chicken, you
 ng anger and frustration. So be aware. Be careful what
 . If you eat anger, you will become and express anger.
 eat despair, you will express despair. If you eat frus-
, you will express frustration.
  have to eat happy eggs from happy chickens. We have
  k milk that does not come from angry cows. We
 drink organic milk that comes from cows that are
naturally. We have to make an effort to support farm-
raise these animals in a more humane way. We also
  buy vegetables that are grown organically. It is more
                         16


  suming Anger Through Other Senses
 ly do we nourish our anger with edible food, but also
h what we consume with our eyes, ears, and con-
ess. The consumption of cultural items is also linked
 r. Therefore, developing a strategy for consuming is
 portant.
 at we read in magazines, what we view on television,
o be toxic. It may also contain anger and frustration.
 s like a piece of beefsteak. It can contain anger. If you
 e it, you are eating anger, you are eating frustration.
aper articles, and even conversations, can contain a lot
 r.
  may feel lonely sometimes and want to talk to some-
 one hour of conversation, the other person’s words
ison you with a lot of toxins. You may ingest a lot of
which you will express later on. That is why mindful
 ption is very important. When you listen to the news,
ou read a newspaper article, when you discuss some-
 ith others, are you ingesting the same kind of toxins
u ingest when you eat unmindfully?
                         17


are those who take refuge in eating to forget their sor-
d their depression. Overeating can create difficulties for
 estive system, contributing to the arising of anger. It
o produce too much energy. If you do not know how
dle this energy, it can become the energy of anger, of
d of violence.
hen we eat well, we can eat less. We need only half the
t of food that we eat every day. To eat well, we should
ur food about fifty times before we swallow. When we
y slowly, and make the food in our mouth into a kind
 id, we will absorb much more nutrition through our
  es. If we eat well, and chew our food carefully, we get
 utrition than if we eat a lot but don’t digest it well.
 ing is a deep practice. When I eat, I enjoy every morsel
food. I am aware of the food, aware that I am eating.
n practice mindfulness of eating—we know what we
wing. We chew our food very carefully and with a lot
 From time to time, we stop chewing and get in touch
  e friends, family, or sangha—community of practi-
—around us. We appreciate that it is wonderful to be
 here chewing like this, not worrying about anything.
                         18


 d lovingly by others. It is very pleasant.
 en the food in your mouth becomes almost liquefied,
 erience its flavor more intensely and the food tastes
ry good. You may want to try chewing like this today.
re of each movement of your mouth. You will dis-
hat the food tastes so delicious. It may only be bread.
ut any butter or jelly at all. But it’s wonderful. Perhaps
l also have some milk. I never drink milk. I chew milk.
I put a piece of bread into my mouth, I chew for a
n mindfulness, and then I take a spoonful of milk. I
n my mouth, and I continue to chew with awareness.
 n’t know how delicious it can be just chewing some
 d some bread.
 en the food has become liquid, mixed with your saliva,
f digested already. So when it arrives in your stomach
estines, the digestion becomes extremely easy. Much of
rients in the bread and milk will be absorbed into our
 ou get a lot of joy and freedom during the time you
  hen you eat like this, you will naturally eat less.
 en you serve yourself, be aware of your eyes. Don’t
 em. It is your eyes that push you to take too much
ou don’t need so much. If you know how to eat mind-
                        19


 g something very simple like zucchini, carrots, bread,
 lk may turn out to be the best meal of your life. It’s
rful.
 ny of us in Plum Village, our practice center in France,
 perienced this kind of eating, chewing very mindfully,
owly. Try eating like this. It can help you to feel much
in your body and, therefore, in your spirit, in your
  usness.
 r eyes are bigger than our stomach. We have to em-
our eyes with the energy of mindfulness so that we
 xactly what amount of food we really need. The Chi-
rm for the alms bowl used by a monk or nun means
strument for appropriate measure.” We use this kind of
o protect us from being deceived by our eyes. If the
omes to the top of the bowl, we know that it is largely
 nt. We take only that amount of food. If you can eat
 t, you can afford to buy less. When you buy less food,
n afford to buy organically grown food. This is some-
 hat we can do, alone or in our families. It will be a
dous support for farmers who want to make a living
g organic food.
                        20


us need a diet based on our willingness to love and to
   diet based on our intelligence. The Five Mindfulness
 gs are the way out of suffering, for the world and for
 us as individuals (see full text in Appendix A). Look-
ply at the way we consume is the practice of the Fifth
  lness Training.
is mindfulness training concerns the practice of
 l consumption, of following a diet that can liberate
liberate our society. Because we are aware of the suf-
caused by unmindful consumption, we make the
tment:
 to cultivate good health, both physical and mental,
 myself, my family, and my society by practicing
 dful eating, drinking, and consuming. I vow to ingest
y items that preserve peace, well-being, and joy in
body, in my consciousness, and in the collective body
 consciousness of my family and society. I am de-
mined not to use alcohol or any other intoxicant or
ngest food or other items that contain toxins, such as
 ain TV programs, magazines, books, films, and
versations. . . .”
                         21


g. If you drink alcohol mindfully, you can see that it cre-
 fering.The intake of alcohol causes disease to the body
  mind, and deaths on the road.The making of alcohol
 olves creating suffering.The use of the grains in its pro-
n is linked to the lack of food in the world. Mindfulness
ng and drinking can bring us this liberating insight.
 cuss a strategy of mindful consumption with the peo-
  love, with members of your family, even if they are
ung. Children can understand this, so they should par-
  in such discussions. Together you can make decisions
what to eat, what to drink, what television programs to
what to read, and what kind of conversations to have.
 rategy is for your own protection.
  cannot speak about anger, and how to handle our
without paying attention to all the things that we con-
  ecause anger is not separate from these things. Talk to
  mmunity about a strategy of mindful consuming. In
  illage, we try our best to protect ourselves. We try not
sume things that nurture our anger, frustration, and
  consume more mindfully, we need to regularly discuss
 e eat, how we eat, how to buy less, and how to have
 quality food, both edible and the food we consume
h our senses.
                          22


PUTTING OUT THE
      FIRE OF ANGER
             S a v i n g Yo u r H o u s e
someone says or does something that makes us angry,
er. We tend to say or do something back to make the
uffer, with the hope that we will suffer less. We think,
  to punish you, I want to make you suffer because you
ade me suffer. And when I see you suffer a lot, I will
ter.”
ny of us are inclined to believe in such a childish prac-
  e fact is that when you make the other suffer, he will
ind relief by making you suffer more. The result is an
on of suffering on both sides. Both of you need com-
  and help. Neither of you needs punishment.
                          23


 back and take care of your suffering, your anger. Do
  or do anything. Whatever you say or do in a state of
may cause more damage in your relationship.
 st of us don’t do that. We don’t want to go back to
 es. We want to follow the other person in order to
 him or her.
 our house is on fire, the most urgent thing to do is to
k and try to put out the fire, not to run after the per-
u believe to be the arsonist. If you run after the person
spect has burned your house, your house will burn
while you are chasing him or her. That is not wise. You
o back and put out the fire. So when you are angry, if
ntinue to interact with or argue with the other person,
try to punish her, you are acting exactly like someone
ns after the arsonist while everything goes up in flames.
    To o l s f o r C o o l i n g t h e F l a m e s
 ddha gave us very effective instruments to put out the
us: the method of mindful breathing, the method of
 l walking, the method of embracing our anger, the
                        24


 at she also suffers a lot and needs help. These meth-
 very practical, and they come directly from Buddha.
breathe in consciously is to know that the air is en-
 our body, and to breathe out consciously is to know
ur body is exchanging air. Thus, you are in contact
 e air and with your body, and because your mind is
ttentive to all this, you are in contact with your mind,
t as it is. It needs only one conscious breath to be back
act with yourself and everything around you, and three
 us breaths to maintain the contact.
 enever you are not standing, sitting, or lying down,
 going. But where are you going? You have already ar-
  ith every step, you can arrive in the present moment,
n step into the Pure Land or into the Kingdom of
  hen you are walking from one side of the room to the
 r from one building to another, be aware of the con-
 your feet with the earth and be aware of the contact
air as it enters your body. It may help you to discover
any steps you can make comfortably during an in-
and how many during an out-breath. As you breathe
 can say “in,” and as you breathe out, you can say
Then you are practicing walking meditation all day
                          25


 ny people like to read books about different spiritual
 ns or to perform rituals but don’t want to practice
 achings very much. The teachings can transform us no
 what religion or spiritual tradition we belong to, if we
y willing to practice. We will transform from a sea of
o a refreshing lake. Then, not only do we stop suffer-
 t we also become a source of joy and happiness for
 eople around us.
         W h a t D o We L o o k L i k e
            W h e n We ’ r e A n g r y ?
 ver anger comes up, take out a mirror and look at your-
 hen you are angry, you are not very beautiful, you are
 sentable. Hundreds of muscles on your face become
nse.Your face looks like a bomb ready to explode. Look
 one who is angry.When you see the tension in her, you
e frightened.The bomb in her may explode any minute.
 very helpful to see yourself in moments when you are
It is a bell of mindfulness. When you see yourself like
ou are motivated to do something to change it. You
  hat to do to look more beautiful. You don’t need any
                        26


uch better. Just look in the mirror, breathing in calmly,
ng out smiling, and you will feel relief.
ger is a mental, psychological phenomenon, yet it is
linked to biological and biochemical elements. Anger
you tense your muscles, but when you know how to
 ou begin to relax and your anger will decrease. Smil-
ws the energy of mindfulness to be born in you, help-
  to embrace your anger.
  ld times, servants of kings and queens always had to
mirror, because whenever anyone was presented to the
 r, they had to be perfect in their appearance. So for the
 formal etiquette, people would carry a pouch with a
  irror inside. Try it. Carry a mirror with you and look
 see what state you are in. After you have breathed in
t a few times, smiling at yourself, the tension will be
nd you will obtain some relief.
       Embracing Anger with the
        Sunshine of Mindfulness
 s like a howling baby, suffering and crying. The baby
  is mother to embrace him. You are the mother for
                         27


 , to cradle and embrace the baby. Just embracing your
 just breathing in and breathing out, that is good
  . The baby will feel relief right away.
 plants are nourished by sunshine. All of them are sen-
o it. Any vegetation that is embraced by the sunshine
 dergo a transformation. In the morning, the flowers
ot yet opened. But when the sun comes out, the sun-
mbraces the flowers and tries to penetrate them. The
ne is made of tiny particles, photons. The photons
lly penetrate the flower one by one until there are a lot
m inside. At that point the flower cannot resist any
and has to open herself to the sunshine.
the same way, all mental formations and all physio-
 formations in us are sensitive to mindfulness. If
  lness is there, embracing your body, your body will
 rm. If mindfulness is there, embracing your anger or
 , then they, too, will be transformed. According to the
a and according to our experience, anything embraced
energy of mindfulness will undergo a transformation.
ur anger is like a flower. In the beginning you may not
tand the nature of your anger, or why it has come up.
you know how to embrace it with the energy of mind-
, it will begin to open. You may be sitting, following
                         28


After ten or twenty minutes your anger will have to
erself to you, and suddenly, you will see the true na-
 your anger. It may have arisen just because of a wrong
 ion or the lack of skillfulness.
                Cooking Anger
ed to sustain your mindfulness for a certain amount of
 order for the flower of anger to open herself. It’s like
ou cook potatoes; you put the potatoes in the pot,
 , and put it on the fire. But even with a very high
 f you turn the fire off after five minutes, the potatoes
t be cooked. You have to keep the fire burning for at
 teen or twenty minutes in order for the potatoes to
  fter that, you open the lid, and you smell the won-
 roma of cooked potatoes.
  r anger is like that—it needs to be cooked. In the be-
  it is raw. You cannot eat raw potatoes. Your anger is
fficult to enjoy, but if you know how to take care of
  ok it, then the negative energy of your anger will be-
he positive energy of understanding and compassion.
   can do it. It is not something only a Great Being can
                          29


fifteen minutes. The secret is to continue the practice
 dful breathing, the practice of mindful walking, gen-
 the energy of mindfulness in order to embrace your
 brace your anger with a lot of tenderness. Your anger
 our enemy, your anger is your baby. It’s like your stom-
your lungs. Every time you have some trouble in your
  r your stomach, you don’t think of throwing them
 he same is true with your anger. You accept your anger
e you know you can take care of it; you can transform
positive energy.
   Tu r n i n g G a r b a ge I n t o Fl o w e r s
 ganic gardener does not think of throwing away the
e. She knows that she needs the garbage. She is capa-
 transforming the garbage into compost, so that the
st can turn into lettuce, cucumbers, radishes, and flow-
 n. As a practitioner, you are a kind of gardener, an or-
ardener.
ger and love are both of an organic nature, and that
 they both can change. Love can be transformed into
                        30


at, without our partner, we cannot survive. Yet if we
practice mindfulness, it takes only one or two years for
e to be transformed into hatred. Then, in our partner’s
 e we have the opposite feeling, we feel terrible. It be-
 mpossible to live together anymore, so divorce is the
 y. Love has been transformed into hatred; our flower
ome garbage. But with the energy of mindfulness, you
k into the garbage and say, “I am not afraid. I am ca-
f transforming the garbage back into love.”
 ou see elements of garbage in you, like fear, despair,
 red, don’t panic. As a good organic gardener, a good
 oner, you can face this: “I recognize that there is
  in me. I am going to transform this garbage into
 ing compost that can make love reappear.”
ose who have confidence in the practice don’t think of
g away from a difficult relationship. When you know
  niques of mindful breathing, mindful walking, mind-
ng, and mindful eating, you can generate the energy of
 lness and embrace your anger or your despair. Just
ing it will give you relief. Then as you continue em-
 , you can practice looking deeply into the nature of
 ger.
the practice has two phases. The first phase is em-
                       31


eeply into the nature of your anger to see how it has
bout.
     C a r i n g f o r Yo u r B a b y , A n g e r
 ve to be like a mother listening for the cries of her
  a mother is working in the kitchen and hears her baby
 she puts down whatever she is doing, and goes to
 t her baby. She may be making a very good soup; the
 important, but it’s much less important than the suf-
of her baby. She has to put down the soup, and go the
 oom. Her appearance in the room is like sunshine be-
he mother is full of warmth, concern, and tenderness.
 st thing she does is pick up the baby and embrace him
y. When the mother embraces her baby, her energy
 tes him and soothes him. This is exactly what you
 learn to do when anger begins to surface. You have to
 n everything that you are doing, because your most
 ant task is to go back to yourself and take care of
aby, your anger. Nothing is more urgent than taking
are of your baby.
                         32


eel better until your mother came and put her hand on
 rning forehead? That felt so good! Her hand was like
d of a goddess. When she touched you with her hand,
 freshness, love, and compassion penetrated into your
 he hand of your mother is your own hand. Her hand
 live in yours, if you know how to breathe in and out,
 indful. Then, touching your forehead with your very
nd, you will see that your mother’s hand is still there,
 g your forehead. You will have the same energy of
d tenderness for yourself.
e mother holds her baby with mindfulness, fully con-
ed on him. The baby feels some relief because he is
 eld tenderly by his mother, like the flower embraced
sunshine. She holds the baby not only for the sake of
  the baby, but also to find out what is wrong with him.
  she is a true mother, and very talented, she can find
at is wrong with her baby very quickly. She is a baby
 st.
practitioners, we have to be anger specialists. We have
  d to our anger; we have to practice until we under-
he roots of our anger and how it works.
                         33


 g the baby mindfully, the mother quickly discovers the
f his suffering.Then it is very easy for her to correct the
 n. If the baby has a fever, then she will give him med-
  help the fever go down. If he is hungry, she will feed
 rm milk. If the diaper is too tight, she will loosen it.
practitioners, we do exactly like this. We hold our baby
 r in mindfulness so that we get relief. We continue the
e of mindful breathing and mindful walking, as a lul-
r our anger. The energy of mindfulness penetrates into
 rgy of anger, exactly like the energy of the mother
 tes into the energy of the baby. There’s no difference
f you know how to practice mindful breathing, smil-
d walking meditation, it is certain that you will find re-
five, ten, or fifteen minutes.
     D i s c o v e r i n g t h e Tr u e N a t u r e
                  o f Yo u r A n g e r
 moment you become angry, you tend to believe that
 isery has been created by another person. You blame
 her for all your suffering. But by looking deeply, you
                            34


 tuation, would not get angry like you. They hear the
ords, they see the same situation, and yet they are able
calm and not be carried away. Why do you get angry
y? You may get angry very easily because your seed of
  too strong. And because you have not practiced the
 s for taking good care of your anger, the seed of anger
n watered too often in the past.
 of us have a seed of anger in the depth of our con-
 ess. But in some of us, that seed of anger is bigger
  r other seeds—like love or compassion. The seed of
may be bigger because we have not practiced in the
  hen we begin to cultivate the energy of mindfulness,
t insight we have is that the main cause of our suffer-
 our misery, is not the other person—it is the seed of
n us. Then we will stop blaming the other person for
  all our suffering. We realize she or he is only a sec-
 cause.
  get a lot of relief when you have this kind of insight,
u begin to feel much better. But the other person still
 in hell because she does not know how to practice.
ou have taken care of your anger, you become aware
  is still suffering. So now you can focus your attention
other person.
                          35


 someone does not know how to handle his own suf-
 he allows it to spill all over the people around him.
 you suffer, you make people around you suffer. That’s
 tural. This is why we have to learn how to handle our
ng, so we won’t spread it everywhere.
hen you are the head of a family, for instance, you
hat the well-being of your family members is very im-
t. Because you have compassion, you do not allow your
ng to harm those around you. You practice to learn
  handle your suffering because you know that your
ng is not an individual matter, your happiness is not an
 ual matter.
hen someone is angry, and doesn’t know how to han-
 anger, she is helpless, she suffers. She also makes the
 around her suffer. At first, you feel that she deserves
ment. You want to punish her because she has made
 fer. But after ten or fifteen minutes of walking medi-
and mindful looking, you realize that what she needs
 and not punishment. This is a good insight.
is person may be someone very close to you—she may
r wife, he may be your husband. If you don’t help him
 who will?
                         36


  r. This insight motivates you to go back to him. No
   help, except you. Now you are filled with the desire
 rn and help. It is a completely different kind of
 g—there is no more wish to punish. Your anger has
ansformed into compassion.
e practice of mindfulness leads to concentration and
  Insight is the fruit of the practice, which can help us
 ve, to love. In a period of fifteen minutes, or half an
  e practice of mindfulness, concentration, and insight
  rate you from your anger and turn you into a loving
 That is the strength of the dharma, the miracle of the
 .
      Stopping the Cycle of Anger
was a twelve-year-old boy who used to come to Plum
 every summer to practice with other young people. He
 roblem with his father because every time he made a
  or fell and hurt himself, instead of helping, his father
 hout at him and call him all sorts of names: “You stu-
  ! How can you do something like that to yourself ?”
 ould happen just because the boy would fall down
                         37


rried, and had children, he would not treat his children
at. If his son was playing and got hurt and bled, he
not shout at him. He would embrace his son and try
  him.
e second year he was in Plum Village, he came with his
 r sister. His sister was playing with other girls on the
  ck, and suddenly she fell off. She hit her head on a
f rock, and blood began to stream down her face. Sud-
he young man felt the energy of anger coming up. He
out to shout at his younger sister: “You stupid girl!
ould you do something like that to yourself ?” He was
 o do the same thing that his father had done to him.
cause he had practiced in Plum Village for two sum-
  e was able to stop himself. Instead of shouting, he
to practice mindful walking and mindful breathing
 thers helped his sister. In just five minutes he experi-
  moment of enlightenment. He saw that his reaction,
 er, was a kind of habit energy that had been trans-
 to him by his father. He had become exactly like his
 the continuation of his father. He did not want to
 s sister like that, but the energy transmitted to him by
her was so strong that he almost did exactly what his
had done to him.
                          38


  ractice in order to transform this habit energy, so that
ld not transmit it to his children. He knew that only
ctice of mindfulness could help him to stop this cycle
ering.
e boy was also able to see that his father was a victim
transmission of anger as well. His father might not
 nted to treat him like that, but he had done so because
 it energy in him was too strong. The moment this in-
 me to him, that his father was also a victim of trans-
 , all of his anger toward his father vanished. A few
s later, he suddenly had the desire to go back home and
  is father to practice with him. As a young man of
years old, that was quite a realization.
             A Good Gardener
you understand the suffering of the other person, you
e to transform your desire to punish, and then you
  ly to help him or her. At that moment, you know that
 actice has succeeded. You are a good gardener.
 de every one of us is a garden, and each practitioner
 o back to it and take care of it. Maybe in the past, you
                         39


n order. Restore the beauty; restore the harmony in
 rden. Many people will enjoy your garden, if it is well
.
        Ta k i n g C a r e o f Yo u r s e l f,
        Ta k i n g C a r e o f t h e O t h e r
 dren, our fathers and our mothers taught us how to
  , how to walk, how to sit, how to eat, and how to
But when we come to the practice, we are reborn, as
al beings. So we have to learn how to breathe again,
  lly. We learn how to walk again, mindfully. We want
n how to listen again, mindfully and with compassion.
nt to learn how to speak again, with the language of
  honor our original commitment. “Darling, I suffer. I
 ry. I want you to know it.” This expresses faithfulness
  commitment. “Darling, I am doing my best. I am tak-
od care of my anger. For me and for you also. I don’t
o explode, to destroy myself and destroy you. I am
my best. I am putting into practice what I have learned
  y teacher, from my sangha.” This faithfulness will in-
espect and confidence in the other party. And lastly,
                         40


don’t need you.”
 ou can say these three sentences with sincerity, from
art, a transformation will take place in the other per-
u cannot doubt the effect of such a practice. You in-
 the other person to start practicing, too, just by your
 r. She will think, “He is faithful to me. He is keeping
  mitment. He is trying to do his best. I must do the
 n taking good care of yourself, you take good care of
loved one. Self-love is the foundation for your capac-
ove the other person. If you don’t take good care of
 , if you are not happy, if you are not peaceful, you can-
ke the other person happy. You cannot help the other
 you cannot love. Your capacity for loving another
depends entirely on your capacity for loving yourself,
ng care of yourself.
   e a l i n g t h e Wo u n d e d C h i l d Wi t h i n
 f us still have a wounded child alive within us. Our
  may have been caused by our father or our mother.
her may have been wounded when he was a child. Our
                          41


 hey have transmitted their wounds to us. If we do not
  ow to transform and heal the wounds in ourselves, we
ng to transmit them to our children and grandchildren.
  why we have to go back to the wounded child in us,
  him or her heal.
metimes the wounded child in us needs all of our at-
 . That little child might emerge from the depths of our
  usness, and ask for our attention. If you are mindful,
ll hear his or her voice calling for help. At that mo-
nstead of contemplating the beautiful sunrise, you go
nd tenderly embrace the wounded child within you.
  ing in, I go back to my wounded child; breathing out,
ake good care of my wounded child.”
 take good care of ourselves, we must go back and take
 the wounded child inside of us. You have to practice
  ack to your wounded child every day. You have to em-
 im or her tenderly, like a big brother or a big sister. You
  talk to him, talk to her. And you can write a letter to
le child in you, of two or three pages, to say that you
ize his or her presence and you will do everything you
heal his or her wounds.
hen we speak of listening with compassion, we usually
 f listening to someone else. But we must also listen to
                         42


ow. “My dear little wounded child, I’m here for you,
   listen to you. Please tell me all your suffering, all your
am here, really listening.” And if you know how to go
  her, to him, and listen like that every day for five or
 utes, healing will take place. When you climb a beau-
ountain, invite your little child within to climb with
 hen you contemplate the beautiful sunset, invite him
 o enjoy it with you. If you do that for a few weeks or
months, the wounded child in you will be healed.
  lness is the energy that can help us do this.
         B e c o m i n g a Fr e e Pe r s o n
inute of practice is one minute of generating the en-
 mindfulness. It doesn’t come from outside of you; it
 rom within. The energy of mindfulness is the kind of
that helps us to be here, to be fully present in the here
  now. When you drink tea in mindfulness, your body
ur mind are perfectly united. You are real, and the tea
nk also becomes real. When you sit in a café, with a
music in the background and a lot of projects in your
ou’re not really drinking your coffee or your tea. You’re
                          43


 only reveal itself to you as a reality when you go back
  self, and produce your true presence, freeing yourself
he past, the future, and from your worries. When you
 , the tea also becomes real and the encounter between
d the tea is real. This is genuine tea drinking.
u can organize a tea meditation to provide an oppor-
 or your friends to practice being truly present in order
 y a cup of tea and each other’s presence. Tea medita-
a practice. It is a practice to help us be free. If you are
 und and haunted by the past, if you are still afraid of
ure, if you are carried away by your projects, your fear,
nxiety, and your anger, you are not a free person. You
  fully present in the here and the now, so life is not
 vailable to you. The tea, the other person, the blue
e flower, is not available to you. In order to be really
   order to touch life deeply, you have to become a free
. Cultivating mindfulness can help you to be free.
e energy of mindfulness is the energy of being present.
nd mind united. When you practice mindful breathing
dful walking, you become free of the past, free of the
 free of your projects, and you become totally alive
esent again. Freedom is the basic condition for you to
 ife, to touch the blue sky, the trees, the birds, the tea,
                         44


f for many months to be able to do. One hour of
e can help you to be more mindful. Train yourself to
 our tea mindfully, to become a free person while
 g tea. Train yourself to be a free person while you
reakfast. Any moment of the day is an opportunity for
 train yourself in mindfulness and to generate this
   D a r l i n g , I K n o w Yo u A r e T h e r e ,
         a n d I A m Ve r y H a p p y ”
mindfulness, you can recognize what is there in the
 moment, including the person you love. When you
  your beloved, “Darling, I know you are there, and I
   happy,” it proves that you are a free person. It proves
u have mindfulness, you have the capacity to cherish,
eciate what is happening in the present moment. What
ening in the present moment is life. You are still alive
  person you love is still there, alive, in front of you.
e amount of mindfulness you cultivate in yourself is
 portant. You embrace the other person with this en-
 mindfulness. You look at her or him lovingly and you
                         45


happy, too, because she or he has been embraced by
indfulness. When you can be with the other person in
ay, the chances of getting angry are already much
.
yone can practice this; and you do not have to practice
 onths in order to do it. You need only one or two min-
 mindful breathing or mindful walking, in order to
lish yourself in the here and the now, to be alive again.
 ou go to the other person, you look into his eyes, you
 nd you make this declaration, “Darling, it is so won-
that you are here, alive. It makes me very happy.”
ndfulness makes you and the other person happy and
he other person may be caught in her worries, anger,
 getfulness, but with mindfulness you can save her and
f. Mindfulness is the energy of the Buddha, the energy
ghtenment. The Buddha is present whenever you are
 l, embracing both of you in his loving arms.
                        46


THE LANGUAGE OF
           T R U E LO V E
                 A Pe a c e Ta l k
 ctice with our family, we practice with our spiritual
 because alone we cannot succeed easily. We need allies.
  ast, we were allied in making each other suffer more,
n the escalation of anger. Now we want to be allied in
good care of our sorrow, our anger, and our frustra-
 e want to negotiate a strategy for peace.
rt a peace talk with your beloved one: “Darling, in the
 have made each other suffer so much. Both of us were
 of our anger.We made a hell for each other. Now, I want
ge. I want us to become allies, so that we can protect each
 ractice together, and transform our anger together. Let
                         47


our collaboration. I cannot succeed without you.” You
 say these words to your partner, your son, your daugh-
’s time to do it.This is awakening.This is love.
u may attain some enlightenment just by listening to
nutes of a dharma talk. But you have to maintain that
enment in your daily life, so that you can bring it home
 gin to apply it to your daily life. As enlightenment
 n you, confusion and ignorance will have to withdraw.
not only influence your thinking, but also your body
ur way of living. So it is very important to go to your
r, to your beloved one, and negotiate a strategy of
a strategy of consuming, a strategy of protection. You
  bring the best of yourself: your talent, your skillful-
 erything, in order to succeed at this negotiation table
 you will no longer make each other suffer. You want
n anew, you want to transform yourself. It’s up to you
  ince the other person.
    Reestablishing Communication
 s a young American who did not speak with his father
  years. Conversation was entirely impossible. One day
                         48


   to become a monk. With great eagerness to learn, he
with the Plum Village sangha for three or four months,
proved he was capable of becoming a monk. From the
came to our center, he practiced mindful consumption,
   meditation, sitting meditation, participating in all
vities of the sangha.
 did not expect anything from his father, he just began
 mself. Thanks to that kind of living, making peace
mself, he was able to write his father every week. Not
ng an answer at all, he wrote to his father about his
e, the small joys he felt every day. Six months later, he
up the phone, and breathed in and out mindfully. This
 him to stay calm. He dialed the number, and his fa-
swered. His father knew that he had become a monk,
 was very angry about that. So the first thing he said
  re you still with that group? Are you still a monk?
 s your future?” The young man replied, “Dad, my
  concern now is how to establish a good relationship
n us. That would make me very happy. It is the most
ant thing to me. To be able to communicate with you
o be able to be close again, that is my only concern. It
  important than anything, including the future.”
  father kept silent, for a long time. The young monk
                        49


t the only thing his father felt for his son. In many let-
 e young man had written about beautiful things that
urished the positive elements in his father. From that
  his father called him every week. Communication has
 established, and the happiness of both father and son
w become a reality.
          Pe a c e B e g i n s w i t h Yo u
 we can make deep changes in our lives, we have to
 to our diet, our way of consuming. We have to live in
way that we stop consuming the things that poison us
oxicate us. Then, we will have the strength to allow the
 us to arise, and we will no longer be victims of anger,
 tration.
 rything is possible when the door of communication
 . So we must invest ourselves in the practice of open-
 and restoring communication. You have to express
 illingness, your desire to make peace with the other
. Ask him to support you. Tell him, “Communication
n us is the most important thing to me. Our relation-
                          50


  have to start negotiating a strategy. No matter how
he other person can do, you have to do all that you are
 of doing yourself. You must give one hundred percent
self. Whatever you can do for yourself, you do for him,
 er. Don’t wait. Don’t put forth conditions, saying, “If
n’t make an effort to reconcile, then I won’t either.”
 ll not work. Peace, reconciliation, and happiness begin
 u.
s wrong to think that if the other person does not
 or improve, then nothing can be improved. There are
ways to create more joy, peace, and harmony, and you
cess to them. The way you walk, the way you breathe,
  you smile, the way you react, all of this is very im-
 . You must begin with this.
ere are many ways to communicate, and the best way
ow that you no longer feel any anger or condemnation.
ow that you understand and accept the other person.
mmunicate this not only by your words, but also by
ay of being—with your eyes full of compassion and
 tions full of tenderness. The fact that you are fresh
asant to be around already changes a lot. No one can
oming close to you. You become a tree with a cool
                        51


 joyable. When you begin with yourself, you will be
  restore communication, and the other person will
 naturally.
                  Pe a c e Tr e a t y
l our beloved one, “My darling, in the past we have
 ach other suffer so much, because neither of us was
   of handling our anger. Now we have to work out a
y for taking good care of our anger.”
e dharma can remove the heat of anger, and the fever
ering. It is a wisdom that can bring joy and peace in the
 d the now. Our strategy for peace and reconciliation
 be based on this.
henever the energy of anger comes up, we often want
 ess it to punish the person whom we believe to be the
 of our suffering. This is the habit energy in us. When
 er, we always blame the other person for having made
er. We do not realize that anger is, first of all, our busi-
   e are primarily responsible for our anger, but we
 very naively that if we can say something or do some-
 o punish the other person, we will suffer less. This
                          52


 ship. Instead, we should try not to do anything or say
 g when we are angry.
  en you say something really unkind, when you do
 ing in retaliation, your anger increases. You make the
 erson suffer, and he will try hard to say or do some-
 ack to get relief from his suffering. That is how the
   escalates. This has happened so many times in the
  u are both very familiar with the escalation of anger,
ering, and yet you have not learned anything from it.
 to punish the other person is only going to make the
 n worse.
  ishing the other person is self-punishment. That is
 every circumstance. Every time the United States
ries to punish Iraq, not only does Iraq suffer, but the
 o suffers. Every time Iraq tries to punish the U.S., the
 ffers, but Iraq also suffers. The same is true every-
between the Israeli and Palestinian, between the Mus-
d Hindu, between you and the other person. It has
been like that. So let us wake up; let us be aware that
 ng the other is not an intelligent strategy. Both you
  other person are intelligent. You can use your intelli-
You must come together and agree on a strategy for
care of your anger. You both know that trying to pun-
                        53


 nstead, you will take care of your anger by going back
rselves—practicing mindful breathing and mindful
g.
 e advantage of the moments when you are happy to-
to sign the contract, your peace treaty, a treaty of true
our peace treaty should be written and signed entirely
 basis of love, not like a peace treaty signed by politi-
 ties. They base their treaties only on national self-
 . They are still full of a lot of suspicion and anger. But
eace treaty must be purely a love treaty.
             Embracing Anger
uddha never advised us to suppress our anger. He
 us to go back to ourselves and take good care of it.
 something is physically wrong with us, in our in-
s, our stomach, or our liver, we have to stop and take
are of them. We do some massage, we use a hot-water
 we do everything possible in order to take care of
t like our organs, our anger is part of us. When we are
we have to go back to ourselves and take good care of
                          54


 y, “I don’t want you stomach, go away.” No, you take
 it. In the same way, we have to embrace and take good
 our anger. We recognize it as it is, embrace it, and
  he energy that helps us do these things is mindfulness,
 lness of walking and mindfulness of breathing.
           Happiness Is Not an
             Individual Matter
oes not mean that you have to hide your anger. You
 let the other person know that you are angry and that
 fer. This is very important. When you get angry with
  e, please don’t pretend that you are not angry. Don’t
  that you don’t suffer. If the other person is dear to
en you have to confess that you are angry, and that you
Tell him or her in a calm way.
 rue love, there is no pride. You cannot pretend that
n’t suffer. You cannot pretend that you are not angry.
ind of denial is based on pride. “Angry? Me? Why
 I be angry? I’m okay.” But, in fact, you are not okay.
   in hell. Anger is burning you up, and you must tell
artner, your son, your daughter. Our tendency is to
                        55


 he beginning you told each other, “I cannot live with-
u. My happiness depends on you.” You made declara-
ke that. But when you are angry, you say the opposite:
t need you! Don’t come near me! Don’t touch me!”You
  o go into your room and lock the door. You try your
  demonstrate that you don’t need the other person.
  a very human, very ordinary tendency. But this is not
   . Happiness is not an individual matter. If one of
not happy, it will be impossible for the other person to
py.
 A R L I N G , I A M A N G RY . I S U F F E R .”
 “Darling, I love you,” is good, it is important. It is nat-
at we share our joy and good feelings with our beloved
  t you also have to let the other person know when you
when you are angry with him or her. You have to ex-
  hat you feel. You have the right. This is true love.
ng, I am angry at you. I suffer.” Try your best to say it
  lly. There may be some sadness in your voice, that’s
st don’t say something to punish or to blame. “Darling,
ngry. I suffer, and I need you to know it.” This is the
ge of love, because you have vowed to support each
                          56


 is your child or your parent, you must still speak out.
   have the duty to tell him or her when you suffer.
you are happy, share your happiness, with her, with
 hen you suffer, tell your beloved one about your suf-
Even if you think your anger was created by him or
u still have to keep your commitment. Tell him or her
 Use loving speech. This is the only condition.
   must do this as soon as possible. You should not
  ur anger, your suffering to yourself for more than
 four hours. Otherwise, it becomes too much. It can
 you. This would prove that your love, your trust for
 her is very weak. So you have to tell him or her about
 ffering, your anger as soon as you can. Twenty-four
s the deadline.
   may feel you are not capable of telling him or her
way because you are not yet calm. You are still very
So practice mindful breathing and walking outdoors.
  hen you feel calm and ready to share, you speak. But
  eadline comes close, and you are not yet calm, then
 e to write it down. Write a Peace Note, a peace mes-
eliver the letter to her and make sure she gets it before
 four hours have passed. This is very important. Each
                         57


of your peace treaty.
 A M D O I N G M Y B E S T .”
are committed to changing things, you can go further.
n add another sentence when you let the other person
hat you suffer. You can add, “I’m doing my best.” This
you refrain from acting out of anger. It means that you
 cticing mindful breathing and mindful walking in
o embrace your anger with mindfulness. You are prac-
  ccording to the teaching. Don’t say, “I am doing my
 nless you practice. When you are angry, you know
 practice, so you have the right to say, “I am doing my
  hat will inspire confidence and respect in the other
. “I am doing my best” means you are living up to
 mmitment to go home to yourself and take good care
r anger.
hen you are angry, your anger is your baby and you have
   after it. It is like when your stomach is upset, you
  go back to yourself and embrace your stomach. Your
h is your baby at that moment. Our stomach is a phys-
 mation, a physiological formation, and our anger is a
 formation. We must take care of our anger in the
 ay we take care of our stomach or kidneys. You can-
                          58


  taking good care of your anger. You are practicing
 l breathing and walking to release the energy of anger
nsform it into positive energy.
  ile embracing your anger, you practice looking deeply
 he nature of your anger because you know that you
 the victim of a wrong perception. You may have mis-
 ood what you heard and what you saw. You may have
g idea of what had been said, what had been done.
nger is born from such ignorance and wrong percep-
   hen you say “I am doing my best,” you are aware that
 ast you have gotten angry many times because of your
perception of what was going on. So now you are very
 You remember that you should not be so sure that you
victim of the other person’s wrongdoing, the victim of
er person’s words. You yourself may have created the
ide you.
   E A S E H E L P M E .”
ird sentence follows naturally, “Please help me. Dar-
need your help.” That is the language of true love.
you get angry with the other person, you have the ten-
 o say the opposite—“Don’t touch me! I don’t need
an manage very well without you!” But you have made
                        59


  u still need the other person to help you in your
e. “Darling, I need your help. Please do help me.”
you are capable of writing or saying these three sen-
 you are capable of true love. You are using the au-
 language of love. “Darling, I suffer, and I want you to
t. Darling, I am doing my best. I’m trying not to blame
 else, including you. Since we are so close to each other,
 e have made a commitment to each other, I feel that I
our support and your help to get out of this state of
ng, of anger.” Using the three sentences to communi-
 th the other person can quickly reassure and relieve
 her. The way you handle your anger will inspire a lot
fidence and respect in the other person, and in your-
 is is not very difficult to do.
     Tr a n s f o r m i n g A n g e r To g e t h e r
 re the other person, and you shared these three sen-
with me, I would see that you are very faithful to me,
 u really have true love for me. Not only when you’re
do you share your happiness, but when you suffer, you
are your suffering. When you tell me you are doing
                           60


chings and your community of practice. When you
   these three sentences, you are embracing your teacher
ur sangha in your heart.
ause you are doing your best, I end up doing my best.
 ck to myself and practice. In order to be worthy of
 ave to look deeply, and also do my best. I have to ask
 “What did I say, what did I do to have made her or
 fer like that? Why did I do that?” Just listening to you,
ding the Peace Note you gave me, I can recover myself.
 arma, after having touched you, is now beginning to
me, and it is my turn to be inhabited by the energy of
 lness.
when the other person receives your message, a mes-
mmunicated by loving speech, he will be inspired by
ve, by your language, and by your practice. A lot of
ing and respect is born in him when the message has
across. He will be willing to go back to himself and
der whether he has done or said anything that has
ou suffer. In this way you have conveyed to him your
e. He will see that you are doing your best. And in
o respond to that, he also will want to do his best. He
   silently to himself: “Darling, I am also doing my
                        61


f you. There is no danger anymore. You have come
  yourself, practicing looking deeply in order to truly
tand the situation. If during this time, one of you ex-
 es an insight into what is really going on, then you
  tell the other person right away what you have dis-
 .
haps you become aware that you became angry be-
 f a wrong perception. When you have such an insight,
ve to tell the other person right away. You must let her
hat you are sorry that you got angry for nothing. She
t do anything wrong at all. You got angry because you
 erstood the situation. Telephone her, fax her, e-mail
cause she is still very concerned about your suffering.
 ill give her relief right away.
 ooking back, the other person may also realize that she
d or done something out of irritation or because of a
 perception. She regrets what she has said or done to
 d so she also has to share her insight. “Darling, the
 ay, I was not very mindful. I said something incorrect.
  misperception. I did something unkind, and I see it
cause I was not skillful enough. I did not mean to
ou suffer. So I apologize and I promise that next time,
more skillful, more mindful.” When you get this mes-
                          62


oner. Your mutual respect for each other continues to
nd respect is the foundation of true love.
             The Special Guest
  ietnamese tradition, husband and wife are expected to
 ch other like a guest. You really respect each other.
you change your clothes, you don’t change in front of
her. You behave with reverence. If respect for the other
is no longer there, true love cannot continue for long.
ting each other, treating each other as a guest, is tra-
l in Asian society. I believe this attitude existed in the
 so, at least in old times. Without such mutual respect,
  not last for a long time. Anger and other negative en-
  ill begin to dominate.
 he wedding ceremonies performed in Plum Village,
 eat center in France, the couple bows to each other, to
  eir respect. This is because each person has the Bud-
ture within—the capacity to be enlightened, to de-
reat compassion and great understanding. When you
 your partner with respect, you notice your love. If
 longer have any respect for the other person, love is
                         63


 ng these three sentences of true love, looking deeply
nowledge our responsibility in the conflict, is a very
 e way to express our respect and nourish our love. Do
derestimate the three sentences of true love.
          Pe b b l e i n Yo u r Po c k e t
molecule of these three sentences consists entirely of
ve. Love can handle anything. You may like to write
hree sentences down on a piece of paper the size of a
card and slip it into your wallet. Revere that sheet of
 s something that can save you because it will remind
 your commitment to each other.
me of us keep a pebble in our pocket, a beautiful peb-
picked up in the front yard. We washed it very carefully
 ays carry it with us. Every time we put our hands in
cket, we touch the small pebble, and hold it gently. We
e mindful breathing and we feel very peaceful. When
rises, the pebble becomes the dharma. It reminds us of
ee sentences. Just holding the pebble, breathing in and
mly and smiling, can help you tremendously. It sounds
bit childish, but this practice is very useful. When you
                         64


ocket serves as your teacher, as your fellow practi-
—it is a bell of mindfulness, allowing you to pause
urn to your breathing.
ny people invoke the name of Jesus or Buddha
 ha with a rosary. The pebble is a kind of rosary, a re-
 that your teacher is always with you, your dharma
s and sisters are always with you. It will help you to go
  your breathing, allow love to be born in you, and
 at love in you alive. It can help keep enlightenment
 you.
                        65




T R A N S F O R M AT I O N
              Zones of Energy
  w that when anger is present in us we should refrain
 acting, namely from speaking, or doing anything. To
  ething, to do something while you are angry is not
  e are urged to go back to ourselves in order to take
are of our anger.
  er is a zone of energy in us. It is part of us. It is a suf-
  aby that we have to take care of. The best way to do
 o generate another zone of energy that can embrace
 e care of our anger. The second zone of energy is the
of mindfulness. Mindfulness is the energy of the Bud-
 is available to us, and we are capable of generating it
                        67


a notion. It is a reality, because all of us are capable of
 ing the energy of mindfulness.
ndfulness means to be present, to be aware of what is
 n. This energy is very crucial for the practice. The en-
f mindfulness is like a big brother, big sister, or a
 , holding the younger one in her arms, taking good
  the suffering baby, which is our anger, despair, or
y.
ergy Zone One is anger, and Energy Zone Two is
 lness. The practice is to use the energy of mindfulness
gnize and embrace the energy of anger. You have to do
erly, without violence. This is not an act of suppress-
r anger. Mindfulness is you and anger is also you, so
ouldn’t transform yourself into a battlefield, one side
g the other. You should not believe that mindfulness is
nd correct, while anger is evil and wrong. You should
nk like that. You only need to recognize that anger is
ive energy and that mindfulness is a positive one. Then
n use the positive energy in order to take care of the
 e one.
                          68


actice is based on the insight of non-duality. Both our
e feelings and positive feelings are organic and belong
ame reality. So there is no need to fight; we only need
 ace and take care. Therefore, in the Buddhist tradition,
 ion does not mean you transform yourself into a bat-
  with the good fighting the evil. This is very impor-
 u may think that you have to combat evil and chase
 f your heart and mind. But this is wrong. The prac-
 o transform yourself. If you don’t have garbage, you
othing to use in order to make compost. And if
 e no compost, you have nothing to nourish the flower
 You need the suffering, the afflictions in you. Since
  organic, you know that you can transform them and
ood use of them.
      T h e I n s i g h t o f I n t e r- B e i n g
 thod of practice should be non-violent. Non-violence
born only from the insight of non-duality, of inter-
  his is the insight that everything is interconnected and
                          69


 ality, you will still be violent. You will still want to
, to suppress, and to destroy. But once you have pene-
the reality of non-duality, you will smile at both the
and garbage in you, you will embrace both. This insight
 round for your non-violent action.
hen you have the insight of non-duality and inter-
you take care of your body in the most non-violent way
 e. You take care of your mental formations, including
 ger, with non-violence. You take care of your brother,
ster, your father, your mother, your community, and
ociety, with utmost tenderness. No violence can be
 om this kind of attitude. You won’t regard anyone as
my when you have penetrated the reality of inter-being.
e foundation of our practice is the insight of non-
, the insight of non-violence. This insight teaches us
  treat our body with tenderness. We must treat our
 nd our despair with tenderness. Anger has roots in
 ger elements. It has roots in the way we live our daily
 we take good care of everything in us, without dis-
ation, we prevent our negative energies from dominat-
  reduce the strength of our negative seeds so that they
 verwhelm us.
                         70


anger manifests in us, we must recognize and accept
ger is there and that it needs to be tended to. At this
 t we are advised not to say anything, not to do any-
ut of anger. We immediately return to ourselves and
he energy of mindfulness to manifest also, in order to
e, recognize, and take good care of our anger.
 we are advised to tell the other person that we are
hat we suffer. “Darling, I suffer, I’m angry, and I want
 know it.” Then if you are a good practitioner, you
d, “I’m doing my best to take care of my anger.” And
  conclude with the third sentence, “Please, do help
cause he or she is still very intimate, very close to you.
ll need him or her. Expressing your anger in this way
mely wise. It is very truthful, very faithful because in
 inning of your relationship, you made a vow with
artner that you would share everything, positive or
e.
 s kind of language, this kind of communication will
 respect, and motivate the other person to look back
practice like you. He or she will see that you respect
f. You demonstrate that when you are angry, you know
                         71


 n enemy to be punished. You see him or her as an ally
 still there to support you. These three sentences are
 sitive things to say.
member that you have to tell him or her within twenty-
 urs. The Buddha said that a monk has the right to be
but not for more than one night. It’s not healthy to
our anger inside for too long. Do not keep your suf-
or your anger to yourself for more than one day. You
  say these three things in a calm, loving way, and you
 ain yourself to do so. If you are not calm enough to
 your anger and the deadline is drawing close, then you
  write the three sentences down on a piece of paper
liver it to him or her. “Darling, I am angry, I suffer. I
now why you have done this to me, why you have said
 me. I want you to know that I suffer. I am doing my
 practice taking care of my anger. Darling, I need you
  me.” You have to deliver this kind of peace note to
d make sure that he will get it. The moment you tell
 deliver the note to him, you will already feel some
                        72


ay like to add something to your three sentences, to
 ace note: “Let us sit down Friday evening and look
together.” Perhaps you say this on Monday or Tuesday,
still have another three or four days to practice. Dur-
 time, both of you will have a chance to look back and
 and better what caused the conflict. You can come
 r any time, but Friday evening is good because if you
oncile, if you can sort it out, then you will have a
 ful weekend together.
til Friday evening comes, you practice mindful breath-
 looking deeply to understand the roots of your anger.
er you are driving, walking, cooking, or washing, you
 e to embrace your anger with mindfulness. By doing
 have a chance to look deeply into the nature of your
  ou discover that the main cause of your suffering is
d of anger in you, because it has been watered too
 y yourself and by other people.
 er is in us in the form of a seed. The seeds of love and
 sion are also there. In our consciousness, there are
 egative seeds and also many positive seeds. The prac-
o avoid watering the negative seeds, and to identify and
he positive seeds every day. This is the practice of love.
                        73


ve to protect yourself and your beloved ones by prac-
elective watering.You say, “Darling, if you really care for
 ou really love me, please do not water the negative seeds
very day. If you do, I’ll be very unhappy, and if I’m un-
I’ll make you unhappy. So please, please don’t water the
f anger, intolerance, irritation, or despair in me. And I
e not to water these seeds in you. I know that you also
 gative seeds, and I’ll be very careful not to water these
n you, because I know if I do, you’ll be very unhappy.
en I will suffer also. I vow only to water the positive seeds
—the seeds of love, compassion, and understanding.”
Plum Village, we call this the practice of selective wa-
If you get angry very easily, it is because your seed of
 as been watered frequently over many years. You have
  it to be watered. You have not signed a contract with
 ple around you, agreeing to water only the good seeds.
ve not practiced protecting yourself. If you don’t pro-
urself, you don’t protect those you love.
hen we embrace anger and take good care of our anger,
ain relief. We can look deeply into it and gain many in-
The first insight may be that the seed of anger in us
wn a little too big, and it is the main cause of our mis-
                           74


 use of our anger.
  e continue to look deeply, we see that the other per-
 fers a great deal. Someone who suffers a lot always
the people around him or her suffer. He does not
ow to manage his suffering, how to embrace and trans-
. So his suffering continues to grow every day. In the
e have not helped him. We have not practiced selective
 g. If we had practiced watering the positive seeds in
 ry day, he would not be the way he is today.
e practice of selective watering is very effective. Just
ur of practice can make a big difference. One hour of
 g the flower in the other person can make him or her
o bloom. It is not so difficult to do.
             F l o w e r Wa t e r i n g
 ears ago, a couple from Bordeaux came to Plum Vil-
attend a dharma talk.We were celebrating the Buddha’s
 y, and I was giving a talk on selective watering, flower
g. I noticed that the wife was crying silently during the
  talk. Afterwards, I approached the husband and said,
 lower needs to be watered.” He understood immedi-
                         75


nd ten minutes. When they arrived home, the children
 ry surprised to see their mother so fresh and happy, be-
he had not been like that for a long time.
  had many wonderful seeds in her, but her husband
t recognized them. He had not watered them. He had
d only her negative seeds because he did not practice.
  that he was unable to water the positive seeds in her.
s very capable of flower watering, but he needed to
o Plum Village and be reminded of this practice. He
  his teacher to urge him to do it. This is why having a
  nity of practice is so important. You need the sangha;
ed a brother, sister, or friend to remind you of what
eady know. The dharma is in you, but it also needs to
ered, in order to manifest and become a reality. If you
ally practiced watering the positive seeds in your
  , then he or she would not cause you so much suffer-
 ay. So you are partly responsible for your suffering.
           Going Back to Help
 our appointment on Friday, practice looking deeply in
o identify your part in the conflict. Don’t blame every-
                          76


 erson is only a secondary cause.
  en you begin to understand your role in the conflict,
  l even more relieved. Because you are capable of
ng mindfully, of embracing your anger, and releasing
 gative energy, you feel much better after fifteen min-
 practice.
 the other person may still be in hell. She may still be
  g a lot. Your beloved one is your flower, you are re-
  le for her. You have made a vow to take care of him.
 ow you are also partly responsible for the way he or
ow because you have not practiced, you have not taken
 your flower. You feel compassion for her and suddenly
 motivated by the desire to go back and help her. The
 erson may be someone very dear to you. If you don’t
ho will?
e moment you are motivated by the desire to return to
er and help, you know that all the energy of anger has
ansformed into the energy of compassion. Your prac-
  born fruit. The compost, the garbage, has been trans-
  back into a flower. It may take fifteen minutes, half
  , or one hour. It depends on your level of concentra-
 ur level of mindfulness. It depends on the amount of
   and insight you gain during your practice.
                        77


 erson to worry and to suffer anymore. So after you
 entified your responsibility, you immediately pick up
one and call him. “Darling, I feel much, much better
ow. I have been the victim of a wrong perception. I see
how I caused both of us to suffer. Please don’t worry
Friday night.” You do this out of love.
 st of the time, anger is born from a wrong perception.
n looking into the cause of your suffering, you find out
ur anger was born from a wrong perception, you have
the other person right away. He didn’t want to make
ffer, he didn’t want to destroy you, but somehow you
d he did. Every one of us must practice looking deeply
 r perceptions, whether we are a father, mother, child,
 ner.
      A r e Yo u S u r e Yo u ’ r e R i g h t ?
 once had to leave home for a long time. Before he left,
e got pregnant, but he didn’t know it. When he re-
, his wife had given birth to a child. He suspected that
le boy was not his, and believed that he was the son of
 bor who used to come and work for the family. He
                         78


rother came to visit for the first time. When he saw the
  y, he said to the father, “He looks just like you. He’s
 act duplicate.” The brother’s visit was a happy event,
  it helped the father to get rid of his wrong percep-
ut the wrong perception had controlled this man’s life
lve years. It made the father suffer deeply. It made his
ffer deeply, and, of course, the little boy suffered from
  d of hatred.
 act on the basis of wrong perceptions all the time.
 uld not be sure of any perception we have. When you
 the beautiful sunset, you may be quite sure that you
ng the sun as it is in that moment, but a scientist will
  that the image of the sun that you see is the image
 un from eight minutes ago. Sunlight takes eight min-
 reach the earth from such a long distance. Also, when
  a star, you think that the star is there, but the star
ve disappeared already, one, two, or ten thousand years
 have to be very careful with our perceptions, other-
   will suffer. It is very helpful to write on a piece of
 Are you sure?” and hang it up in your room. In med-
 ics and hospitals, they are beginning to hang up these
f signs: “Even if you are sure, check again.” It is a cau-
                          79


  f mental formations. They are thinking in terms of a
 disease. But we can also make use of this slogan—
if you are sure, check again.” We have made ourselves
we made a hell for ourselves and our beloved ones be-
 f our perceptions. Are you sure of your perception?
ere are people who suffer from a wrong perception
 or twenty years. They are sure the other person has be-
them or hates them, even though the other person has
 od intentions. A person who is the victim of a wrong
tion makes himself and the people around him suffer
hen you are angry, and you suffer, please go back and
  very deeply the content, the nature of your percep-
 f you are capable of removing the wrong perception,
 nd happiness will be restored in you, and you will be
 love the other person again.
     L o o k i n g I n t o A n g e r To g e t h e r
 the other person knows that you are doing your best,
g into the cause of your anger, she also is motivated to
                           80


  And she also will have a chance to practice looking
 She knows that in the past, she has reacted in ways
 de you suffer. She begins to question her belief that
ot responsible for your suffering. If she finds out that
  unskillful when saying or doing something, then she
  all or fax you to tell you that she is sorry.
if both of you get some insight during the week, you
eed to wait for Friday. Friday evening can then be-
 very joyful time when both of you sit together and
 nice meal, or perhaps a cup of tea and a piece of
ou can celebrate your love and your relationship.
            Sharing Everything,
        Even W hen It’s Difficult
  er of you has succeeded in the practice, then Friday
e for you to practice deep listening and loving speech.
 e who is angry has the right to tell the other what is
eart. If it is your partner who is angry, you just listen,
  you have made the promise to listen and not to react.
 your best to practice compassionate listening. You lis-
                         81


 d some relief from his suffering.
hen you share your suffering, you have the right to say
 ing in your heart—it is your duty to do so, because the
 erson has the right to know everything. You have made
mitment to each other. You should tell him everything
in your heart, with only one condition—you must use
nd loving speech. The moment irritation manifests,
 ment you think that you are going to lose your calm,
 renity, please stop. “Darling, I cannot continue now,
   meet another time? I need to practice more mindful
g and breathing. I’m not at my best right now, so I do
nk I can succeed in the practice of loving speech.” The
  erson will agree to postpone the session until later,
s next Friday.
  ou are the one who listens, you also practice mindful
 ng. Practice mindful breathing to empty yourself of
 as or notions, in order to listen. Listen with compas-
  d be there with your whole being to give the other per-
ief. You do have the seed of compassion within you,
will manifest when you see that the other person suf-
 much. Therefore you vow to be the Bodhisattva, the
Being of deep listening. This Bodhisattva of Great
  ssion must be a real person, and not just an idea.
                        82


               Make Mistakes
n make a mistake only when you forget that the other
 suffers. You tend to believe that you are the only one
ffers, and that the other person is enjoying your suf-
You will say and do mean and cruel things when you
 that you are the only one who suffers and that the
person does not suffer at all. The awareness that
 er person suffers very much will help you to play the
 the Bodhisattva of deep listening. Compassion be-
possible, and you can keep compassion alive during the
 ime of listening. You’ll be the best therapist for him
ring the time the other person speaks, he may be very
 ntal, only blaming and punishing. He may be
tter and cynical. Yet, because compassion is still in you,
 s not affect you. The nectar of compassion is so won-
If you are committed to keeping it alive, then you are
ed. What the other person says will not touch off the
nd irritation in you, because compassion is the real an-
 or anger. Nothing can heal anger except compassion.
 why the practice of compassion is a very wonderful
e.
                        83


 and that I must help. If I don’t help, who is going to
When listening, you may notice a lot of wrong per-
  s in the other person’s speech. Still, you remain com-
nate, because you know she is a victim of wrong
 ion. If you try to correct her, you may cut her off, pre-
  her from speaking out and fully expressing herself. So
 and listen with all your attention, with your best in-
 s, and this will be very healing.
you want to help correct her wrong perception, you
  wait until the moment is right. While listening, your
m is to give her a chance to speak out and share what
 r heart. You don’t say anything. This Friday evening is
  for her to speak. You just listen. Then, perhaps a few
ter, when she feels much better, you try to give her the
 ation that she needs to correct her perception. “Dar-
 e other day you said something, but that is not really
 appened. What happened is . . .” Use loving speech
 ou correct her. If necessary, ask a friend who knows
 ally happened to help the other person understand the
tuation so that she can be freed from her wrong
tions.
                        84


 s a living thing. It comes up, and it needs time to go
 wn. Even if you have clear evidence to convince some-
 t his anger is entirely based on a wrong perception,
  on’t interfere right away. Like craving, jealousy, and all
ons, anger needs time to die down. This is the case
ter the other person realizes that he or she misunder-
he situation. When you turn off a fan, it continues to
ew thousand times before stopping. Anger is like that.
xpect the other person to stop being angry right away.
 not realistic. You have to allow anger to die down
So don’t rush.
 ence is the mark of true love. A father has to be pa-
  order to show his love for his son or daughter. A
, a son, and a daughter also. If you want to love, you
 arn to be patient. If you are not patient, you cannot
e other person.
   must also be patient with yourself. The practice of
 ing your anger takes time. But just five minutes of
 l breathing, mindful walking, and embracing your
an be effective. If five minutes is not enough, take ten
s, and if ten minutes is not enough, take fifteen min-
                         85


ways to embrace your anger. Even the practice of jog-
 very helpful. Just like when you cook potatoes, you
  keep the fire going for at least fifteen or twenty min-
ou cannot eat raw potatoes. You have to cook your
 n the fire of mindfulness. It may take ten or twenty
s. It may take more.
            G a i n i n g a Vi c t o r y
 cooking your potatoes, you have to cover the pot in
o prevent heat from escaping. That is concentration. So
ou practice walking or breathing to take care of your
don’t do anything else. Don’t listen to the radio, don’t
elevision, don’t read a book. Cover the pot and just do
ng. Just practice deep walking meditation, deep mind-
athing, and use one hundred percent of yourself in
o embrace your anger, exactly like you would take good
 a baby.
er some time of embracing and looking deeply, in-
ill come and your anger will diminish. You’ll feel much
and you’ll be motivated to go back and help the other
                         86


rgy of loving-kindness.
 s is possible. It is like the tulips. When the energy of
  is strong enough, the tulip has to open herself and
er heart to the sun. Your anger is a kind of flower. You
 embrace it with the sunshine of mindfulness. Let the
 of mindfulness penetrate into the energy of anger.
 ve or ten minutes of mindfulness, your anger will be
rmed.
 ry mental formation—anger, jealousy, despair, etc.—
 ive to mindfulness the way all vegetation is sensitive to
 e. By cultivating the energy of mindfulness, you can
ur body and your consciousness, because mindfulness
  ergy of the Buddha. In Christianity, it is said that Jesus
 energy of God, of the Holy Spirit, within him. That
he is able to heal many people. His healing energy is
he Holy Spirit. In Buddhist language, that energy is the
of the Buddha, the energy of mindfulness.
ndfulness contains the energy of concentration, un-
ding, and compassion. Thus, the practice of Buddhist
 ion is the practice of generating the energy that will
  concentration, compassion, understanding, love, and
ess. Everyone in a practice center is doing just that, so
                          87


 .
 n after one session of practice, we notice that we are
pable of taking care of our anger. We have gained a vic-
r ourselves and for our beloved ones. When we lose, we
r beloved ones lose. But when we win a victory, we win
 other person as well. So, even if the other person does
ow the practice, we can practice for both ourselves and
 her. Don’t wait for the other person to practice in
o start practicing. You can do it for both of you.
                        88


  C O M P A S S I O N AT E
 C O M M U N I C AT I O N
may have been a time when you could not commu-
with your parents. Although you lived in the same
you might have felt that your father or mother was
stant. In this situation, both parent and child suffer.
de believes that there is only misunderstanding, ha-
nd separation. The parent and child do not know
ey have many things in common. They do not know
ey both have the capacity to understand, to forgive,
 love each other. Therefore, it is very important to
ze the positive elements that are always there in us
 ent anger and other negative elements from domi-
us.
                       89


 it is raining, we think that there is no sunshine. But if
high in an airplane and go through the clouds, we re-
 r the sunshine again. We see that the sunshine is always
n a time of anger or despair, our love is still there also.
pacity to communicate, to forgive, to be compassion-
 ill there. You have to believe this. We are more than our
we are more than our suffering. We must recognize
  do have within us the capacity to love, to understand,
ompassionate. If you know this, then when it rains you
  e desperate. You know that the rain is there, but the
ne is still there somewhere. Soon the rain will stop,
e sun will shine again. Have hope. If you can remind
 f that the positive elements are still present within
d the other person, you will know that it is possible to
 hrough, so that the best things in both of you can
 p and manifest again.
e practice is there for that. The practice will help you
 he sunshine, touch the Buddha, the goodness within
that you can transform the situation. You can call this
 ss anything you want to, whatever is familiar to you
our own spiritual tradition.
ep down you must know that you are capable of being
                         90


  u can do this by practicing mindful breathing, mind-
king, and mindful sitting.
  a i n i n g O u r s e l v e s t o L i s t e n D e e p l y
unicating is a practice. You have to be skillful in order
municate. Good will is not enough. You have to learn
 do it. Maybe you have lost your capacity to listen.
 the other person has spoken so often with bitterness,
condemning and blaming, that you have had enough.
nnot listen anymore. You begin to try to avoid him or
 u don’t have the capacity to listen to that person
 e.
   try to avoid him out of fear. You don’t want to suf-
 this can also create a misunderstanding, and make him
t you despise him. This can cause him a lot of suffer-
u give him the impression that you want to boycott
  ignore his presence. You cannot face him and at the
me you cannot avoid him. The only solution is to train
f to be able to communicate again. Deep listening is
 .
 know that many people suffer, feeling that no one is
                            91


 eed someone who can listen to us.
day there are people who practice psychotherapy and
e supposed to be there for you, to sit and listen to you
 you can open your heart. They have to listen deeply
 r to be real therapists. Real therapists have the capac-
isten with all their being, without prejudices, without
 nt.
on’t know how therapists train themselves to acquire
 d of capacity to listen. A therapist also may be full of
ng. While sitting and listening to the client, the seeds
ering in him or her may be watered. If the therapist is
elmed by his own suffering, how can he listen properly
other person? When you are trained to be a therapist,
ve to learn the art of deep listening.
tening with empathy means you listen in such a way
e other person feels you are really listening, really un-
 ding, hearing with your whole being—with your
But how many of us can listen like that? We agree in
 le that we should listen with our heart, so that we can
 ear what the other is saying. We agree that we should
e speaker the feeling that he is being listened to and
 nderstood. Only that can give him a feeling of relief.
 fact, how many of us can listen like that?
                         92


 stening, compassionate listening is not listening with
 pose of analyzing or even uncovering what has hap-
 n the past. You listen first of all in order to give the
erson relief, a chance to speak out, to feel that some-
ally understands him or her. Deep listening is the kind
ning that helps us to keep compassion alive while the
peaks, which may be for half an hour or forty-five
s. During this time you have in mind only one idea, one
to listen in order to give the other person the chance
k out and suffer less.This is your only purpose. Other
like analyzing, understanding the past, can be a by-
t of this work. But first of all listen with compassion.
  Compassion Is the Antidote for
          Anger and Bitterness
 keep compassion alive in you while listening, then
 nd irritation cannot arise. Otherwise the things he
e things she says will touch off your irritation, anger,
 fering. Compassion alone can protect you from be-
  irritated, angry, or full of despair.
                         93


you to step in and rescue him. But you have to be
ed with something to do the job.
hen firemen come to help put out a fire, they have to
e right equipment. They must have ladders, water, and
 d of clothing that can protect them from fire. They
 know many ways to protect themselves and to put the
t. When you listen deeply to someone who suffers,
 p into a zone of fire. There is a fire of suffering, of
 urning in the person you are listening to. If you are
ll equipped, you cannot help and you might become a
of the fire in the other person. This is why you need
 ent.
ur equipment here is compassion, which can be nour-
nd kept alive with the practice of mindful breathing.
ul breathing generates the energy of mindfulness. Mind-
athing keeps your basic desire alive, the desire to help
 er person speak out. When the other person speaks,
rds might be full of bitterness, condemnation, and
 nt. These words might touch off suffering in you. But
passion is kept alive in you, through the practice of
 l breathing, you are protected. You are capable of sit-
ere and listening for one hour without suffering. Your
ssion will nourish you, knowing that you are helping
                        94


mpassion is born from happiness and also from un-
ding. When compassion and understanding are kept
  u are safe. What the other person says will not make
 fer and you can listen deeply. You really listen. When
 not have the capacity to listen with compassion, you
 just pretend you are listening. The other person will
that you are full of ideas about suffering, but don’t re-
derstand him or her. When you have understanding,
  listen with compassion, you can listen deeply, and the
 of this listening is the fruit of your practice.
          Nourishing Ourselves
ng suffering can help us nourish our compassion and
 to recognize happiness when it is there. If we are not
act with pain, we cannot know what real happiness is.
 hing suffering is our practice. But each one of us has
We cannot do more than we can do.
 s is why we have to take good care of ourselves. If you
oo much to the suffering, the anger of other people,
l be affected. You will be in touch only with suffering,
   won’t have the opportunity to be in touch with other,
                        95


with elements that do not constantly express suffering:
 , the birds, the trees, the flowers, children—whatever
shing, healing, and nourishing in us and around us.
metimes you get lost in your suffering, in your worries.
ur friends rescue you. They may say, “Look how beau-
he sky is this morning. It is foggy, but it’s really
ul. Paradise is right here. Why don’t you come back to
 sent and witness this beauty?” You are with the com-
 , with brothers and sisters who are capable of being
 So the community rescues you and helps you to be in
again with the positive elements of life. This is the
e of nourishment. It’s very important.
  should be able to live each day deeply, with joy, peace,
mpassion because time goes by so quickly. Each morn-
  fer a stick of incense to the Buddha. I promise myself
will enjoy every minute of the day that is given me to
 s thanks to the practice of mindful walking and mind-
athing that I can enjoy deeply every moment of my
 fe. Mindful breathing and mindful walking are like
ends, always helping me to delve into the here and the
 d touch the wonders of life that are available.
  need to receive the nourishment we deserve. Listen-
 he sound of the bell is a very nourishing and pleasant
                          96


hatever we are doing, to stop our talking and our
g. These are bells of mindfulness. When we hear the
 f the bell, we relax our body and return to our breath-
  realize that we are alive and can get in touch with
 onders of life that are present for us. We stop natu-
 th enjoyment, not with solemnity or stiffness. Breath-
nd out three times, we enjoy the fact that we are alive.
we stop, we restore our calm and peace, we become
 ur work becomes more enjoyable, and the people
 us become more real.
e practice of stopping and breathing with the bell is an
e of the kind of practice that helps you get in touch
e beautiful and nourishing elements in daily life. You
it alone, but with the sangha you can do it much more
  he community is always there. When you get lost in
ffering, it can rescue you and put you in touch with the
  elements of life.
know our limits is our practice. Even if you are a spir-
 cher and you have the capacity of listening to people’s
 g, you have to know your limits. You have to enjoy
  meditation. You have to enjoy your tea. You have to
 e company of happy people so that you get sufficient
 ment. To listen to the other person, you have to take
                         97


urishing compassion in yourself so that you can be well
ed for the task of listening. You have to play the role
reat Being, someone who has so much happiness that
 ble to rescue people from their suffering.
         Yo u A r e Yo u r C h i l d r e n
ther or mother, you have to listen to your son or your
er. This is very important because your son is yourself;
aughter is yourself. Your child is your continuation.
ost important task for you is to restore communication
n you and your child. If your heart does not function
 your stomach is not in good health, you don’t think
ing it out and throwing it away. You cannot say, “You
 my heart! My heart does not behave like that. You are
 stomach! My stomach does not behave like that. I will
 thing to do with you anymore!”This is not intelligent.
ight talk to your son or your daughter like that, and
not intelligent, either.
e moment your son or daughter is conceived in your
 you see yourself and the fetus as one. You may even
 o have a conversation with the baby, “Keep still my
                         98


er you eat and drink, the baby also eats and drinks.
 orries and your joy are the worries and joy of your
ou and the baby are one.
  en you give birth to the baby and the umbilical cord
 his awareness of your unity may begin to fade away.
time your son or your daughter turns twelve or thir-
 u have completely forgotten that she or he is you. You
 f him or her as a separate entity. You have problems
 ch other. Having a problem with your child is like
trouble with your stomach, your heart, your kidneys.
believe that he is another person, a separate entity, you
 , “Go away! You are not my son! You are not my
er! My son doesn’t behave like that. My daughter
 behave like that.” But because you cannot say this to
omach or to your heart, you cannot say it to your son
  daughter. The Buddha said, “There is no separate
  u and your son, you and your daughter are just a con-
  n of many generations of ancestors. You are part of
 tream of life. Whatever your children do continues to
 ou deeply—just like when they were in your womb.
ver you do still affects your children deeply because
n never be cut off from you. Your happiness and suf-
 re your child’s happiness and suffering and vice versa.
                        99


            Starting a Dialogue
 ion and ignorance make us think that we are the only
 ho suffer. We believe that our son or our daughter
ot suffer. But in fact, whenever you suffer, your child
ffers. You are there in every cell of your son’s body, in
ell of your daughter’s body. Every emotion and every
tion in your child, is your emotion and perception.
ore we have to remember the insight that we had in the
ing that he and you, that she and you, are one. Start a
 e with your son or your daughter.
 he past you have made mistakes. You have caused your
h to suffer. The way you have eaten and drunk, the way
ve worried has had a big impact on your stomach, your
  es, your heart. You are responsible for your heart,
  testines, and your stomach. In very much the same
 u are responsible for your son and your daughter. You
 say that you are not responsible. It would be much
o come to your child and say, “My dear child, I know
ffer a lot. For many years, you have suffered a lot.
 you suffer, I suffer, too. How can I be happy when my
                         100


 lution? Can we talk? I really want to restore commu-
n, but alone, I cannot do much. I need your help.”
 s a father or mother, you are capable of saying things
s to your child, the situation may change because you
 ow to use loving speech. Your language comes from
om understanding, and from enlightenment. Enlight-
  of the fact that you and your child are one, and that
ess and well-being are not an individual matter. These
n both of you. So what you say to your child has to
rom your love and understanding, the understanding
  re is no separate self. You can speak like this because
derstand the true nature of both yourself and your
 ou know that your daughter is the way she is because
 the way you are. You are interdependent. You are the
u are because your son is the way he is. You are not
e.
in yourself in the art of mindful living. Train yourself
 you can become skillful enough to restore communi-
 “My dear son, I know that you are me. You are my
 ation, and when you suffer there is no way that I can
  y, so let us come together and sort things out. Please
e.” The son also can learn to speak this way because he
 ands that if his father suffers, he cannot be happy ei-
                        101


 tion with his father. He may be the one who takes the
ve.
e same thing can happen between partners. You have
to live as one. With deep sincerity you have vowed to
our happiness and suffering. Telling your partner that
ed his or her help to begin anew is only a continuation
se vows. Every one of us has the capacity for talking
tening like this.
                  Love Letters
is a French woman who kept old love letters from her
 d. He wrote her beautiful letters before they married.
time she got a letter from him, she savored every
 e—every word—it was so sweet, so understanding,
of love. She was delighted whenever she got a letter, so
 t all his letters in a biscuit box. One morning, while
  rearranging her closet, she discovered the ancient bis-
 x where she stored all his letters. It had been a long
 nce she had seen it. The box of letters told of the
 onderful time, when she and her husband were young,
                         102


 in the past several years, both husband and wife had
d a lot. They didn’t enjoy looking at each other any-
  hey didn’t enjoy talking to each other anymore. They
write letters to each other anymore. The day before
nd the box, her husband informed her that he had to
a business trip. He did not find it pleasant to stay
and perhaps he was looking for a little bit of happi-
pleasure on his trips. She was aware of that. When her
d told her that he had to go to New York for a meet-
  said, “If you have work to do, please go ahead.” She
 wn used to this, it was very ordinary. Then, instead of
ng home as planned, he telephoned and said, “I have
two more days, because there are things I still need to
e accepted this very easily, because even when he was
e, she was not happy.
er hanging up, she began to rearrange her closet and
 overed the box. It was a box of “Lu” biscuits—a very
 brand in France. She was curious because it had been
 time since she opened that box. She put down her
opened the box, and smelled something very familiar.
 k out one of the letters and she stood there and read
  sweet was the letter! His language was full of under-
                       103


ecause it was so wonderful. Finally she brought the
box of letters to the table, sat down, and read one after
r until she finished all forty-six or forty-seven of them.
 eds of her past happiness were still there. They had
uried under many layers of suffering—but they were
ere. So while reading that letter he wrote when he was
 and full of love, she felt the seeds of happiness in her
o be watered.
hen you do something like this, you water the seeds of
ess that lie deep within your consciousness. In the re-
 st, her husband had not been using that kind of lan-
 t all. But now, when reading the letters, she could hear
 band speaking in that sweet way. Happiness had been
y for them. Why did they now live in a kind of hell?
uld hardly remember that he used to talk to her like
ut it had been a reality. He was able to talk to her in
nd of language.
  Wa t e r i n g t h e S e e d s o f H a p p i n e s s
  the hour and a half she spent reading all these letters,
 ered the seeds of happiness in herself. She realized that
                         104


he seeds of happiness. After reading all the letters, she
 tivated by the desire to sit down and write him a let-
ell him how happy she was at that time, in the begin-
  their relationship. She wrote that she wished the
ess of those golden years could be rediscovered and re-
. And now she could again call him, “My beloved
ith all honesty and sincerity.
  spent forty-five minutes writing that letter. It was a
e letter—addressed to the charming young man who
itten the letters she kept in a box. Reading his letters
  n writing a letter took about three hours. It was a
  practice, but she did not know she was practicing.
aving written the letter, she felt very light inside. The
ad not yet been delivered; her husband had not yet read
he felt much better because the seeds of happiness had
awakened, they had been watered. She went upstairs
  the letter on his desk. And for the rest of the day, she
  py. She was happy just because the letters had watered
 itive seeds in her.
  ile reading the letters and writing to her husband, she
some insight. Neither of them had been skillful. Nei-
 them knew how to preserve the happiness they de-
 In their speech, in their actions, they created hell for
                         105


e was confident that if both of them tried to practice,
ess could be restored. She became full of hope and no
suffered as she had in the past years.
hen her husband came home, he went upstairs, and he
  letter on his desk. In the letter, she wrote: “I’m partly
sible for our suffering, for the fact that we don’t have
 piness that both of us deserve. Let us begin anew and
 communication. Let us make peace, harmony, and
ess a reality again.” He spent a lot of time reading the
nd looking deeply into what she had written. He did
ow that he was practicing meditation. But he was prac-
also, because by reading his wife’s letter, the seeds of
ess in him were also watered. He stayed upstairs for a
me, looking deeply and getting the same insight that
  gotten the day before. Because of that, both of them
 hance to begin anew and to restore their happiness.
 wadays, people, lovers, don’t write letters to each other
re. They just pick up the phone and say, “Are you free
 ? Shall we go out?”That’s all, and you have nothing to
 hat is a pity. We must learn to write love letters again.
 o your beloved one, he may be your father or your son.
 y be your daughter, your mother, your sister, or your
Take time to write down your gratitude and love.
                        106


 re many ways you can restore communication. If you
too difficult to talk to your son, why don’t you prac-
ndful walking and mindful breathing for one or two
 hen sit down and write him a love letter. You can use
 e kind of language: “My dear son, I know that you
ffered terribly, and as your father, I am partly respon-
 cause I didn’t know how to transmit the best of my-
you. I know you have not been able to communicate
ffering to me, and I want this to change. I want to be
 r you. Let us help each other and try to improve our
 nication.” You have to learn to speak this kind of
 e.
 ing speech will rescue us. Compassionate listening
cue us. This is a miracle performed by us, as practi-
 You have the capacity to do it. You have enough peace,
 compassion and understanding in the depth of your
 usness. You have to call on it for help, call on the
  within. With a loving friend supporting you, it will
ible for you to begin anew and restore communication.
                       107




  O U R H E A RT S U T R A
          Moment of Gratitude,
       Moment of Enlightenment
are moments when we feel very grateful for the other
 in our life. We deeply appreciate his or her presence.
 full of compassion, gratitude, and love. We have ex-
ed moments like this in our life.We feel so grateful that
er person is still alive, that she is still with us, and has
 y our side during very difficult times. I would suggest
such a moment happens again, take advantage of it.
truly profit from this time, withdraw to a place where
  be alone with yourself. Don’t just go to the other per-
  say, “I’m grateful you are there.” That is not enough.
                        109


 f in that feeling of gratitude. Then write down your
s, your gratitude, your happiness. In half a page or one
 o your best to express yourself in writing, or record
 f on tape.
is moment of gratitude is a moment of enlighten-
of mindfulness, of intelligence. It is a manifestation
he depths of your consciousness. You have this under-
 g and insight in you. But when you get angry, your
de and love do not seem to be there at all. You feel as
 have never existed, so you have to write them down on
 of paper and keep it safely. From time to time, take it
d read it again.
 Heart Sutra, a scripture that is chanted daily by many
ists, is the essence of the Buddha’s teachings on wis-
  hat you have written is a Heart Sutra because it comes
our heart—not from the heart of a Bodhisattva or the
a, but from your own heart. It is your Heart Sutra.
   C h a n t Yo u r H e a r t S u t r a D a i l y
n all learn something from the story of the woman
as saved by the love letters she kept in a biscuit box.
                       110


You can love; you do have the capacity to appreciate
er person, to feel grateful. This is a blessing. You know
 lucky to have met your partner, you are lucky to have
 loved one in your life. Why do you let this truth fly
t is in your heart. So you have to chant your Heart
very day. You have to look at it. Every time you touch
  and appreciation in you, you feel grateful again, you
 his or her presence again.
  have to be alone in order to fully appreciate the other
s presence. If you are always together, then you may
o take him for granted, forgetting to enjoy his beauty
odness. Every now and then, take three or seven days
 e time away from him in order to be able to appreci-
   more. Although you are far away from him, he is
eal to you, more substantial than when you are con-
 together. During the time you are apart, you will re-
r how important, how precious he is to you.
 please, write or produce your own Heart Sutra, or su-
 d keep it in a sacred place. Try to chant your sutra
Then, when anger overwhelms you, and you are not
 enough to embrace it, your Heart Sutra will help
dously. Pick it up, practice breathing deeply in and
d read it. Right away you will come back to yourself,
                       111


 ge is getting yourself to do it. You must create the
 ons, prepare, plan, and organize, so that you can really
 rom your intelligence. Use your talent to arrange and
 hese kinds of practices.
        Leave the Shore of Anger
e still standing on the shore of suffering and anger.
 on’t you leave this shore, and go to the other shore—
 re of non-anger, peace, and liberation? It’s much more
 t there. Why do you have to spend several hours, one
  , or even days suffering in anger? There is a boat you
  to cross very quickly to the other shore. That boat is
actice of returning to ourselves, through mindful
 ng, so that we can look deeply at our suffering, anger,
pression and smile at them. Doing this, we overcome
 n and cross over to the other shore.
 n’t stay on this shore and continue to be the victim of
nger. Non-anger is in you; non-anger is possible. Just
he river and go to the other shore, the shore of non-
It is cool, pleasant, and refreshing there. Don’t allow
 f to be tyrannized by your anger. Free yourself, liber-
                        112


o cross the river and go to the other shore.
ht now you may be standing on the shore of confu-
 ger, or doubt. Don’t stay there; go to the other shore.
he sangha, your brothers and sisters in the dharma,
actice of walking and breathing, your practice of look-
ply, and of chanting your own Heart Sutra, you will
 ry quickly. Maybe in just a few minutes. You have the
  be happy. You have the right to be compassionate, to
 g. The seed of awakening is in you. With the practice,
  turn this seed into a flower right away. You can end
ffering, because the dharma is immediately effective.
icker than aspirin.
G i v e a G i f t W h e n Yo u A r e A n g r y
may be times when you are angry with someone, and
 everything you can to transform your anger, but noth-
ms to work. In this case, the Buddha proposes that you
  other person a present. It sounds childish, but it is
 ective. When we’re angry with someone, we want to
em. Giving them a present changes that into wanting
e them happy. So, when you are angry with someone,
                      113


n’t wait until you get angry to go and buy the present.
 you feel very grateful, when you feel you love him or
 much, then go and buy the present right away. But
 nd it; don’t give it to the other person yet. Keep it. You
ve the luxury of having two or three presents stored se-
n your drawer. Later, when you feel angry, take one out
 iver it. It is very effective. The Buddha was very smart.
    The Relief of Understanding
you are angry, you want to ease your suffering. That is
al tendency. There are many ways to find relief, but the
 t relief comes from understanding. When under-
 g is there, anger will go away by itself. When you un-
  d the situation of the other person, when you
tand the nature of suffering, anger has to vanish, be-
t will be transformed into compassion.
oking deeply is the medicine most recommended for
 f you look, you will understand the other’s difficulties
 ir deepest aspiration that they have never been able to
 Then compassion is born in you and compassion is
                          114


 st of our suffering is born from our lack of under-
 g and insight that there is no separate self. The other
 is you, you are the other person. If you get in touch
at truth, anger will vanish.
mpassion is a beautiful flower born of understanding.
 n you get angry with someone, practice breathing in
t mindfully. Look deeply into the situation to see the
ture of your own and the other person’s suffering, and
 l be liberated.
            D a n g e r s o f Ve n t i n g
are therapists who advise us to express our anger in
o feel better. They suggest we say or do things to let
 er out, like taking a stick and hitting a tire, or slam-
  e door with all your might. They also suggest hitting
 . These therapists believe that this is the way to remove
rgy of anger in us. They call it “venting.”
  en you have smoke in your room, you want to venti-
  room so the smoke can escape. Anger is a kind of
 an energy that makes you suffer. When the smoke of
                         115


 e with a stick, or by pounding on your pillow. I have
 any people practice like that. Actually, they do get
emporary relief. But, the side effects of venting are
 rmful. They will make you suffer much more.
ger needs energy to manifest. When you try to vent it
 g all your might to hit something or pound your pil-
lf an hour later, you will be exhausted. Because you are
 ed, you will have no energy left to feed your anger. You
 ink that anger is no longer there, but that’s not true;
  simply too tired to be angry.
s the roots of anger in you that produce anger. The
  f anger lie in ignorance, wrong perceptions, in the
 understanding and compassion. When you vent your
you simply open the energy that is feeding your anger.
 ots of anger are always there, and by expressing anger
 t, you are strengthening the roots of anger in yourself.
  the danger of venting.
ere was an article in The New York Times, March 9, 1999,
er, titled “Letting Out Aggression Is Called Bad Ad-
According to this article, a lot of research has been
y social psychologists, and they concluded that trying
ess your anger and your aggression by hitting a pillow
                       116


 ile you pound the pillow, you are not calming or re-
your anger—you are rehearsing it. If you practice hit-
illow every day, then the seed of anger in you will grow
ay. And someday, when you meet the person who made
 ry, you may practice what you have learned. You will
 the other person and end up in jail. That is why han-
our aggression by hitting a pillow, or venting, is not
 at all. It is dangerous. It is not truly ventilating the en-
 anger since anger is not getting out of your system.
 ting your anger is a practice based on ignorance.
you imagine the object of your hate as a pillow, hitting
 ect of your hate, you rehearse your ignorance and
 nstead of lessening your violence and anger, you be-
 ore violent and angry.
 umber of therapists have confirmed that the practice
ting anger is dangerous. They told me that they
d advising their clients to do it. After their clients vent
 ng pillows, they are tired, and so they think they feel
But after they rest and have some food, if someone
and waters the seed of anger in them, they become
 grier than before. They have fed the roots of their
y rehearsing it.
                         117


                Yo u A r e S a f e
ve to be there for our anger, we have to recognize its
 e and take good care of it. In psychotherapy this is
“getting in touch with our anger.” It is wonderful and
  portant. You have to recognize and embrace anger
t manifests instead of suppressing it.
  the important question here is who is the one getting
h with, taking care of, and recognizing anger? Anger is
 gy, and if that energy is overwhelming, you can be a
of it. You should be able to generate another kind of
 that can recognize and take care of the anger. Anger
 e of energy that needs to be touched, that needs to be
ized. The question is, what is touching what? What
 can do the touching and the recognizing? It is the en-
  mindfulness. So every time we get angry, we practice
 l breathing and mindful walking, in order to touch the
  mindfulness and generate the energy of mindfulness
ndfulness is not there to suppress. Mindfulness is there
 ome, to recognize: “Hello, my little anger, I know you
 re. My old friend.” Mindfulness is the energy that
 s to be aware of what is there. To be mindful is always
                       118


ay be mindful of the tea you are drinking, and that
 fulness of drinking. When you eat mindfully, that is
lness of eating. When you walk mindfully, it is mind-
 of walking.
his case, we practice mindfulness of anger. “I’m aware
   angry, and I’m aware that anger is in me.” So, mind-
 is touching, recognizing, greeting, and embracing. It
 t fight or suppress. The role of mindfulness is like the
a mother, embracing and soothing the suffering child.
 s in you; anger is your baby, your child. You have to
ry good care of it. When it recognizes anger, mind-
 says, “Hello there, my anger, I know you are there. I
e good care of you, don’t worry.” The moment mind-
is there, you are safe, you can smile, because the energy
Buddha is born in you.
 ou don’t know how to handle your anger, it can kill
 ithout mindfulness, you may become the victim of
t can make you vomit blood and even die. Many peo-
because of anger—it is a shock to your whole system,
es tremendous pressure and pain inside you. When
ddha is present, when the energy of mindfulness is
ou are protected. Mindfulness helps you take care of
tuation. When the big brother is there, the younger
                        119


es better and better at taking care of anger.
hile recognizing and embracing our anger, we must gen-
 indfulness continuously.We can do this by the practice
tinuous mindful walking and breathing. If you don’t
indfulness, nothing you do will bring you relief, even if
  a pillow with all your might. Hitting a pillow doesn’t
  u get in touch with your anger or discover the nature
r anger. You don’t even get in touch with the pillow. If
re in touch with the pillow, then you would know that
  nly a pillow, and not your enemy. Why do you hit the
like that? Because you don’t know that it is just a pillow.
hen you really get in touch with something, then you
 ow its true nature. If you get in touch with one per-
eply, then you know who she or he truly is. If mind-
  is not there, getting in touch with something or
ne is not possible. Without mindfulness, you become
   because your anger pushes you to do harmful things.
Yo u A r e t h e O b j e c t o f Yo u r A n g e r
  o you think you are? You are the other person. If you
 ry with your son, you are getting angry with yourself.
                        120


ontinuation. That is the real truth. Who is your
? Your mother is you. You are her continuation as a de-
  t, and she is your continuation as an ancestor. She
  u to all those who came before, and you link her to
future generations. You belong to the same stream of
 think that she is a different entity, to think that you
 e nothing to do with her is sheer ignorance. When a
man says, “I no longer want to have anything to do
y father,” that is sheer ignorance, because the young
nothing but his father.
a mother, pregnant with your child, you had this in-
hat your child is you. You ate for your baby, you drank
 r baby, you took care of your baby. When you took
 yourself, you took care of your baby. You were very
 because you knew that the baby was you. But by the
 ur child reaches the age of thirteen or fourteen, you
o lose this insight. You and your child feel separated,
nnected. You don’t know how to improve your rela-
p, to make peace after a fight. Soon, the gap between
  of you grows bigger and more solid. Your relation-
comes very difficult and full of conflict.
                       121


seem like you are two separate entities, but if you look
  you will see that you are still one. So settling the dis-
 storing peace between you both, is like restoring peace
yourself, within your own body. You and your child are
same nature, you belong to the same reality.
 ny years ago when I was in London, I walked into a
 op and saw a book entitled My Mother, Myself. This is an
ent title. Your mother, yourself. You can write another
My Daughter, Myself. Or My Son, Myself; My Father, Myself. It
 ctual reality. When you get angry with your son, you
ting angry with yourself. When you punish your son,
 nish yourself. When you inflict suffering on your fa-
ou inflict suffering on yourself. We understand this
  e have the insight of non-self, the insight that the self
e of non-self elements, like our father, mother, all our
  rs, as well as the sun, the air, and the earth.
hen you can touch this insight, the reality of non-self,
 ow that happiness and suffering are not individual
s. Your suffering is the suffering of your beloved ones.
happiness is your happiness. When you know this, you
 t be tempted by the idea of punishing or of blaming.
behave with much more wisdom. This intelligence, this
                         122


r the insight that your child, your partner, is you.
 read a sutra to immerse ourselves in the truth, in the
 of non-self. The Heart Sutra that you are encouraged
   is a sutra that comes from your own insight that you
  other person are one. The Heart Sutra is about wisdom.
our Heart Sutra. It reminds you of the wisdom that
  not separate, isolated selves. It reminds you of the
   of your love. When you are angry, when you are mis-
he idea that you are a separate self, reading that Heart
  ill help you return to yourself again. When insight is
hen the Buddha is there, and you are safe. You don’t
 suffer anymore.
 have to constantly remind ourselves that there are
   ays of getting relief from anger, but the best, the
  relief comes from understanding, the insight of non-
  n-self is not an abstract philosophy. Non-self is a re-
at you can touch by living mindfully. The insight of
 f will restore peace and harmony between you and
er person. You deserve peace, you deserve happiness.
 why you have to sit down with him, with her, and de-
trategy for living together.
 thermore, you yourself must also figure out a way of
hat will bring you harmony and peace. You have to sign
                        123


e you lack wisdom, you lack insight. With under-
 g, you can restore peace and harmony in yourself and
  relationships with others. You will know how to act
w to react with intelligence so that you are no longer
 r zone, a zone of conflict. If there is peace and har-
n you, the other person will recognize it, and peace and
ny between both of you will be restored quickly. You
 much more pleasant, much easier to be with, and that
lp the other person tremendously.
 to help your son, make peace with yourself. Look
into yourself. If you want to help your mother, restore
n yourself. Discover the insight that will allow you to
 ur mother. Helping yourself is the first condition for
  the other. Let go of the illusion called self. This is the
  of the practice that will free you and the other per-
 m anger and suffering.
                       124


          NO ENEMIES
            B e g i n w i t h Yo u r s e l f
ut communication, no real understanding can be pos-
 ut be sure that you can communicate with yourself
 you cannot communicate with yourself, how do you
 to communicate with another person? Love is the
  you don’t love yourself, you cannot love someone else.
 cannot accept yourself, if you cannot treat yourself
ndness, you cannot do this for another person.
y often you behave exactly like your father, but you
 alize it. And though you behave like him, you feel you
 l opposites. You do not accept him, you hate him.
you do not accept your father, you do not accept your-
                        125


 nicate with your father.
e self is made of non-self elements; therefore, under-
 g ourselves is our practice. Our father is a non-self
t. We say our father is not us, but without our father,
not exist. So he is fully present in our body and in our
He is us. Thus, if you understand yourself, your whole
u understand that you are your father—he is not out-
 you.
ere are so many other non-self elements that you can
and recognize within yourself—your ancestors, the
he sun, water, air, all the food you eat, and much more.
seem like these things are separate from you, but with-
 m, you could not live.
 pose two warring parties want to negotiate, and both
 o not know enough about themselves. You have to
now yourself, your country, your party, your situation,
r to understand the other’s party, the other’s nation, the
people. Self and others are not two separate things, be-
he suffering, hope, and anger of both sides is very
he same.
hen we get angry, we suffer. If you really understand
 u also will be able to understand that when the other
                         126


ent enough to see that the person suffers from his own
e and anger. But we tend to forget.We think that we are
y one that suffers, and the other person is our oppres-
 is is enough to make anger arise, and to strengthen
ire to punish. We want to punish the other person be-
 e suffer. Then, we have anger in us; we have violence
ust as they do. When we see that our suffering and
re no different from their suffering and anger, we will
 more compassionately. So understanding the other is
 anding yourself, and understanding yourself is under-
 g the other person. Everything must begin with you.
understand ourselves, we must learn and practice the
 non-duality. We should not fight our anger, because
  our self, a part of our self. Anger is of an organic na-
  e love. We have to take good care of anger. And be-
t is an organic entity, an organic phenomenon, it is
e to transform it into another organic entity. The
  can be transformed back into compost, into lettuce,
o cucumber. So don’t despise your anger. Don’t fight
 ger, and don’t suppress your anger. Learn the tender
  taking care of your anger, and transform it into the
of understanding and compassion.
                        127


standing and compassion are very powerful sources of
 They are the opposite of stupidity and passivity. If
 nk that compassion is passive, weak, or cowardly, then
 n’t know what real understanding or compassion is.
 think that compassionate people do not resist and
 ge injustice, you are wrong. They are warriors, heroes,
roines who have gained many victories. When you act
ompassion, with non-violence, when you act on the
 f non-duality, you have to be very strong. You no
 act out of anger, you do not punish or blame. Com-
   grows constantly inside of you, and you can succeed
  fight against injustice. Mahatma Gandhi was just one
. He did not have any bombs, any guns, or any politi-
ty. He acted simply on the insight of non-duality, the
h of compassion, not on the basis of anger.
 man beings are not our enemy. Our enemy is not the
  erson. Our enemy is the violence, ignorance, and in-
in us and in the other person. When we are armed with
ssion and understanding, we fight not against other
  but against the tendency to invade, to dominate, and
 oit. We don’t want to kill others, but we will not let
                        128


u have insight. Being compassionate does not mean
g other people to do violence to themselves or to you.
  ompassionate means being intelligent. Non-violent
  hat springs from love can only be intelligent action.
ng compassionate doesn’t mean suffering unnecessar-
osing your common sense. Suppose you are leading a
of people doing walking meditation, moving slowly
autifully. The walking meditation generates a lot of
 it embraces everyone with calm, solidity, and peace.
  denly it begins to rain. Would you continue to walk
 letting yourself and everyone else get soaked? That’s
elligent. If you are a good leader of the walking med-
 you will break into a jogging meditation. You still
  n the joy of the walking meditation. You can laugh
ile, and thus you prove that the practice is not stupid.
n also be mindful while running and avoid getting
  We have to practice in an intelligent way. Meditation
   stupid act. Meditation is not just blindly following
er the person next to you does. To meditate you have
killful and make good use of your intelligence.
                        129


kind does not mean to be passive. To be compassion-
 s not mean to allow others to walk all over you, to
ourself to be destroyed. You have to protect yourself
otect others. If you need to lock someone up because
 ngerous, then you have to do that. But you have to do
compassion. Your motivation is to prevent that person
ontinuing his course of destruction and from feeding
er.
u don’t have to be a monk in order to be compassion-
u can be a policeman. You can be a judge or a prison
But as a policeman, a judge, or prison guard, we need
 be a Bodhisattva. We need you to be beings of great
ssion. Although you have to be very firm, you should
keep compassion alive in you.
d if you practice mindful living, you have to help the
  an act out of compassion and non-fear. The police in
  e are full of fear, anger, and stress, because they have
saulted many times. Those who hate the police and in-
em don’t understand the police yet. In the morning,
he police put on their uniform and guns, they are not
at they will return home alive in the evening. The po-
 fer very much. Their families suffer very much. They
                         130


ffering, and violence in them, they also can become
 of society like other people. So, as a police chief, if
lly understand the minds and hearts of the people on
 lice force, you will train yourself in such a way that
 sion and understanding will be born in your heart.
ou will be able to educate and help the policemen and
 who have to go out on the streets every morning,
ight, to do the hard task of keeping the city in peace.
 rance the police are called “peace-keepers.” But if you
ave peace in you, how can you keep peace in the city?
 ve to keep peace in yourself first. And peace here
non-fear, intelligence, and insight. The police do learn
 er of techniques in order to protect themselves, but
 ense techniques are not enough. You have to be intel-
  ou have to act out of non-fear. If you are too fearful,
u will make many mistakes. You will be tempted to use
 n, and you may kill many innocent people.
         We C a n n o t Ta k e S i d e s
 Angeles, four policemen beat a black driver nearly to
The press talked about it all over the world, and every-
                       131


 e sides, you act as though you are outside of the con-
ou act as though you are not the black driver who was
 or the four policemen. But looking deeply, you see
u are the victim of the beating, and you are also the
 licemen who did the beating. Anger, fear, frustration,
 lence are in the person who was beaten and in those
d the beating. Just as they are in us.
understand the police and help them suffer less, let us
e that we are the husband or wife of a police officer.
together, you are in touch with how hard your spouse’s
So every morning and every evening, you want to do
 ing to help your spouse to transform his or her anger,
 d frustration. When you are capable of helping your
d or wife suffer less, then the whole city will profit—
 e delinquent youth. This is the best way to help the
 nity. With intelligence, insight, and compassion, you
p avoid a lot of accidents.
       A Dialogue to End Anger
                 a n d Vi o l e n c e
 age of a police officer full of violence, prejudice, and
 ot a positive image. So many young people see the po-
                       132


ustration.We must organize a meeting, a dialogue, be-
 olice and the youngsters who have committed acts of
e, and who have been put in prison. Why don’t we or-
this kind of conversation and give the police a chance
k about their frustration, anger, and fear? And why don’t
w these youngsters who fight with the police to speak
 ut their frustration, anger, and fear?Why don’t we tele-
s dialogue so that a whole nation can learn from it?
 s would be true meditation: looking deeply, not as an
ual, but as a city, as a nation.We have not seen the truth.
e seen a lot of movies, detective stories, andWesterns,
have not seen the truth that is in the hearts and minds
 people. We should organize this kind of dialogue so
e truth can be shown to the whole population.
            Bombing Ourselves
please forgive them, because they do not know what
  doing,” said Christ. When someone commits a crime
kes others suffer, it is because he does not know what
 ing. Many young people commit crimes, and they do
 w, they do not understand how much suffering their
                          133


 mmitting these acts of violence and expressing anger
 sen their anger. But the anger in them will only con-
o grow.
hen you drop bombs on your enemy, you drop the
 ombs on yourself, on your own country. During the
Vietnam, the American people suffered just as much as
 tnamese people. The wounds of war are as deep in
 a as in Vietnam. Stopping violence is what we have to
d we cannot stop violence unless we have the insight
hat we do to the other person, we are doing to our-
Teachers must show students that when they are vio-
 ey themselves will suffer. But teachers cannot just tell
his, they have to be more creative than that. We should
dogmatic in our way of sharing insight with others. We
 be flexible and intelligent, using “skillful means.”
l means is very important. A Great Being has to be
 in the practice and in helping other people.
  t o p p i n g Wa r s B e f o r e T h e y H a p p e n
 ajority of us wait until a war breaks out in order to
  ome kind of effort to stop it. Many of us do not
                        134


  while it is still hidden. We begin to focus our atten-
  the war only when the war breaks out into the open
ople start talking about it. Then we feel overwhelmed
ntensity of the war. We feel helpless. We take sides and
t one is right and the other is wrong. We condemn one
  t we have nothing to contribute towards ending the
tion caused by the war.
a true practitioner, you have to practice looking deeply
e situation to see the war before it starts. You have to
 cting in order to stop the war before it breaks out
   open. With your insight and awareness, you can help
 eople to wake up and develop the same awareness.
 ogether you can act skillfully in order to prevent the
m breaking out into the open.
e countries of NATO thought that violence, bombing
 e, was the only solution to ending racial discrimina-
the former Yugoslavia. They believed that there was no
 ay. They were not able to see and respond to the roots
 which were already apparent before the war started,
  their capacity of looking deeply, of meditation is
. Violence can never bring about peace and under-
 g. Only by looking deeply in order to understand the
ots of violence can we achieve peace.
                        135


  ination without resorting to bombs or other violent
There are many wars about to break out everywhere on
net. If you are really a person of peace, you should be
  f that, and try your best, together with your commu-
  stop these wars before they blow up, causing extreme
e. If you want to stop violent interventions like the one
ovo, then you have to offer an alternative. If you have
  idea, you can transmit that idea to your congress-
 or senator and urge them to intervene so that a more
e course of action can be taken. We need to learn to
 te as a nation, not only as individuals, in order to
  the kind of insight that will be able to stop war and
 e.
             Collective Insight
is a young man who is a vegetarian, not because he is
 or dogmatic, but out of mindfulness. He does not eat
 h of animals because he doesn’t have the heart to eat
His father was very unhappy about this, and so there
  harmony or joy in his home. The young man knew
 could not stop being vegetarian, because he would be
                        136


tinue. He used his intelligence; he did not remain
e day he came home with a videotape, and said, “Dad,
  wonderful documentary film.” He then showed a
 bout the slaughter of animals to his father and the
family. His father experienced so much suffering in
  g animals being slaughtered that after having seen
m, he did not want to eat meat anymore. The insight
ect; it was not an idea. Instead of using anger, instead
ng suffering overwhelm him, the young man acted out
  g-kindness, wisdom, and intelligence. He was able to
 e the whole family not to eat animals so that com-
  could be nourished within each one of them. The act
wing that documentary film was very skillful, and full
  With skillful action, you can win a very big victory.
an individual, you may have some insight, and that in-
ves rise to compassion and a willingness to act. But as
vidual, you can only do so much. If other people do
 e the same insight, you have to do your best to make
sight a collective one. Yet you cannot force your insight
  rs. You may force them to accept your idea, but then
  ply an idea, not a real insight. Insight is not an idea.
 y to share your insight is to help create the conditions
                        137


ness and patience.
       Helping Love to Reappear
is a sister in Plum Village who is still very young—
-two. She was able to help a mother and daughter to
 le just after they vowed never to see each other again.
 riod of three hours, she was able to help the mother
e daughter resolve their conflict. In the end, both of
 racticed hugging meditation. They gently took each
n their arms and breathed in and out mindfully several
They practiced, “Breathing in, I am aware that I am
 reathing out, I am aware that my beloved one is still
ere in my arms.” They practiced to be mindful of the
each other’s presence and were deeply in touch with the
  moment, putting one hundred percent of themselves
 act of embracing the other. It was very healing.
gh the practice, they realized that they loved each other
uch. They did not know that they loved each other so
because they had not been skillful in their relationship,
  way of speaking and listening.
t because anger or hate is present does not mean that
                       138


 erstanding to reappear in yourself and the other per-
 ase do not believe that love is not in you. It’s not true;
 always in you. It is like the sunshine; even when it
he sunshine is always there a little bit above the clouds.
go above the clouds, you see plenty of sunshine. So if
ieve that there is no love in you, that you feel only hate
other person, you are wrong. Wait until the other per-
s. You will cry and cry and wish that he could come
 life. This shows that love is there. You should give love
 e to manifest, while the other person is still alive. To
 ve to reappear you have to know how to manage
 ger. Anger always goes together with confusion, with
 ce.
          G o i n g Pa s t J u d g m e n t
 e you are the teacher of a five-year-old girl. When her
 comes to pick her up from school, you see that the
 is aggressive, making the little girl suffer. What can
  You can do a lot. The child will listen to you, so you
p her to understand her mother. You can also give her
 e to speak out and tell you of the difficulties she has
                        139


 r the two of you to help her mother. You can teach her
  act and react in moments when the mother becomes
  nd violent to avoid making the situation worse. It is
  portant to help the little girl, because when there is a
 in her, it will have a good effect on the mother.
 the teacher of the young girl, you also have access to
 ther. If you have compassion and insight you will be
 help. Otherwise, you will only judge the mother as
 and the daughter as right. You will only be able to
mn the mother’s abusive behavior. You oppose her vio-
  ith her child, but it is not helpful just to express your
 oval. You have to do something. You have to act out of
ssion and insight, not only for the abused child, but
r the child’s mother and father. If you cannot help her
 nd mother, you cannot help the child. You may see the
   the victim, as the only one who needs help. But if you
   ant to do everything you can to help the child, you
elp the mother and father—who you considered to be
emy. If you do not help them you cannot help the
Helping the parents is helping the child. The parents
 of ignorance, they are full of violence and anger, and
 why their child suffers. So you have to have compas-
                          140


 e of parents in order to take care of children.
          Serving Our Country
ench government is trying hard to take care of young-
ho are violent. They do have some insight. They un-
 d that the violence and the suffering of these
ters are caused by society. In order to know how to re-
we must listen like a doctor. We must listen very care-
  the organism of society, to see why the youngsters
  so violent, so angry. If we do this, we will see that the
f their anger and violence are in the family, in the way
 conduct their daily life. And the roots of family vio-
 e found in the way society is organized and how peo-
sume.
e government is also people. The government is made
ers, of mothers, of sons, of daughters. And these fa-
  others, sons, and daughters also carry the violence of
 mily within them. So if the French prime minister
  t practice looking deeply, does not see the anger, vi-
 depression, and suffering within himself, he will not
                        141


government, in the ministry of youth, in the ministry
cation, etc., and see their suffering. As citizens, as a
ment, we must act, but on what basis should that ac-
ke place? On the basis of understanding.
we have practiced looking deeply enough in order to
 roots of anger and violence in our society, then we will
 ot of compassion for our young people. We will know
  t locking them up and punishing them is not going to
 his is what the former French Prime Minister Jospin
d. So he and his government do have some insight.
a people, as citizens, we have to help. We have to help
  this kind of insight. As an educator, as a parent, as an
  s a writer, we have to practice so that we have enough
 to help our government.
  n if you are in a different political party than the rul-
rty, you have to practice. When you help the ruling
you are helping your country. It is your country that
  st help, not a political party. And if the current French
minister now has a chance to do something to improve
ndition of the young people in France, then the ap-
  te way to serve your country is to offer him your in-
nd your help. This does not mean you betray your
 or your party. Your party exists in order to serve your
                          142


 You have to see that compassion is above any politi-
liation. This is not partisan politics but intelligent
 . They are politics that are humane, that aim at the
ing and the transformation of society, not just at gain-
  er.
                      143




  V I D A N D A N G E L I N A :
T H E H A B I T E N E RGY
           OF ANGER
was a young man named David. He was a very hand-
oung man and quite intelligent. He was born into a
  ily and had everything he needed to be successful. But
not enjoy life. He was not capable of being happy. He
ot of problems with his parents, brothers, and sisters.
 not know how to communicate. He was a very ego-
person, so he always blamed his father, his mother, his
 nd his brothers for his misery. He suffered a lot, but
not miserable because everyone hated him, or because
 e wanted to punish him. He was miserable because he
  capable of loving, of understanding. He was able to
riends for a few days, but soon after that his friends
leave him because it was quite difficult to be around
                       145


 e day he went to a Buddhist temple in the town, but
listen to a dharma talk. He did not care about dharma
  e went with the hope of making new friends because
 in desperate need of a friend. So far no one had been
 remain his friend. He was rich, he was handsome, and
 eople were interested in getting to know him. But all
m abandoned him after a short time.
that morning he went to the temple because life with-
riend was hell. He was thirsty for a friend, for a part-
en if he was not capable of keeping a friend or a
 . And when he came to the temple, he passed a group
ple coming out, and among them was a very beautiful
lady. The image of the young lady moved him deeply,
 was love-struck, dumbfounded. He was no longer in-
d in entering the temple anymore, and he turned
  in order to follow the group. Unfortunately, another
of people came streaming in, and the crowd made it
lt for David to leave. When he managed to get out of
  ple, the group and the beautiful lady had vanished.
 searched all over for one hour but could not find her,
 went home carrying that beautiful image in his heart.
 ld not sleep that night, or the next night. And then on
 d night, he saw a beautiful old man with a white beard
                       146


 he did not feel like sleeping anymore. He got up and
 until noon before setting out on his search for the
 ady.
  en he arrived at the Eastern market, there were not
eople. It was still too early, so he went into a bookshop
 an to look around. Suddenly, he looked up and he saw
 ng of a very beautiful young lady hanging on the wall.
he same young lady he had seen three days before at the
 The same eyes, the same nose, the same mouth. In the
he was told he would meet that lady in the market, but
this was what the old man meant—the picture was all
d have. “Maybe I deserve only an image,” he thought.
t deserve a reality.” So instead of buying books, he
  his money to buy that painting. He brought it home,
hung it on the wall of his dormitory room at college.
 was a lonely person. He did not have friends. Often
not go to the campus cafeteria. Instead, he stayed home
  instant noodles. You may have already guessed that
 s Asian. That day, he prepared two bowls of instant
s, and two pairs of chopsticks. The second bowl was
 lady in the painting. He enjoyed his noodles, and
me to time he looked up and invited the lady in the
g to eat.
                        147


ny, so that they can pour out all their love and care on
y buy the most expensive food for their pet. For many
  it is much easier to love a cat or a dog because they
 rgue with you. When you say something that is not
 ey don’t react. The same thing was true with David. He
ive in peace with the lady in the painting, but if the real
ere there, he might not be able to live with her for
han twenty-four hours.
 e day he could not finish his bowl of noodles. Life
  to have no flavor at all. He had had it up to his neck.
  moment, he looked up at the painting. He was about
 “What’s the use of living anyway?” when he saw the
 ink her eyes and smile. He was very startled. He
 t that he was in a dream. He rubbed his eyes and
 up again, and there she was, perfectly still. A few days
e saw the lady smile and blink her eyes again. He was
rprised. He continued to look at her, and suddenly she
  a real person and stepped down from the painting.
 me was Angelina, because she came from heaven. You
 imagine how happy the young man was. He was in
 e. To have such a beautiful young lady as a friend,
ould be more wonderful?
  you may have already guessed the rest of the story. He
                        148


 was impossible to live with someone like David. One
 g he woke up and found a note on his desk. The
 ady had gone for good. She wrote: “David, it is im-
e to live with you. You are too self-centered, you have
 city to listen to anyone.You are intelligent, handsome,
h. But you don’t know how to maintain a relationship
 other human being.” That morning, David wanted to
  self. He thought that if he could not even manage to
h such a sweet, beautiful lady, then he must be worth-
e looked for a piece of rope to hang himself with.
 ry year in France, twelve thousand people commit sui-
hat is about thirty-three every day. That’s far too many.
avid is among them, waiting for you to rescue him. In
ited States and throughout Europe, the rate of suicide
 much the same. People are overwhelmed by despair.
ny of us, communication has become impossible and
longer has meaning.
Offering the Incense of the Heart
David was tying a knot in the rope, he suddenly re-
red that one day Angelina smiled and said, “David, if
                        149


 convince him to come to the temple with her to lis-
  dharma talk. There, the monk was explaining how to
 cense as a way of communicating. When you burn in-
you want to communicate with the Buddha, with the
attvas, with our ancestors. If we can communicate with
cestors, we can communicate also with our brothers
ters around us. So the monk was talking about com-
 ting through the act of offering incense. He said that
ense we offer should be the incense of our heart: the
  of mindfulness, the incense of concentration, the in-
 f wisdom, of insight. David was there sitting close to
na, but he did not listen very deeply. However, he heard
  to remember that event. After both of them left the
, Angelina turned to him and said, “David, if someday
nt to get in touch with me, offer some incense.”
membering this, he dropped the rope, ran to the store
 and bought a bundle of incense. But David did not
how to burn incense. In Plum Village every time we
 cense, we use only one stick. He used the whole bun-
d in just a few minutes, his room was filled with smoke.
ited for fifteen minutes, half an hour, one hour, but
na did not show up. So then he remembered what the
said—“For true communication to be possible, you
                        150


Burning incense without mindfulness wouldn’t work.
 id sat there and thought deeply about his situation.
  that he had not succeeded with his parents, with his
 s and sisters, with his friends, with his society. He
n failed with Angelina. He began to see that he always
 other people for his suffering. This was the first time
a few moments of concentration and he began to have
  sight. This was the first time in his life he sat down
 and saw that he had been unjust to his parents, and
mmunication was not possible partly because of him.
  blamed everyone. He hadn’t understood until now
 was responsible. Even with such a sweet and beauti-
 on like Angelina, he had not succeeded.
 the first time, tears ran down his cheeks, and he was
 rry for the way he had treated his parents, brothers,
and friends. He remembered the time he came home
 very late at night, beat Angelina and abused her. He
t of all of this, and suddenly a drop of compassion
ted his heart, a heart so full of suffering and afflic-
  nd he continued crying. The more he cried, the more
 d he felt in his heart. A transformation took place
him. He began to understand what Angelina had tried
him, about how to live according to the Five Mind-
                        151


at if Angelina ever came back, he would be a different
. “I will know how to take care of her, and how to
 appiness possible.” At that moment there was a knock
 door. Angelina was back. Although David had prac-
arely one hour, his transformation was profound.
   avid and Angelina Are Among Us
   think that David is only a person in a story, a person
past. No. David is still alive; he sits here among us. An-
too. Remember that David was intelligent, handsome,
had a very strong habit energy of always blaming oth-
his misery. He couldn’t communicate with his parents,
thers, his sisters, or his friends. He made them suffer.
  not want to make them unhappy, but his habit energy
o strong, so he could not avoid it. He was lonely, and
ught that he was the only one in the world who was
nely. He was thirsty for the understanding of another
 being, a person who could stand by his side. All of us
 is need—it is very human. We need someone who can
 nderstand us and help us confront the difficulties of
                        152


  a stepped into his life. From time to time, this kind
d fortune happens to us, too. Sometimes a very nice
 steps into our life. And if we know how to take care
 person, our life becomes more meaningful. But if we
now how to take care of ourselves and our habit en-
e will not know how to take care of our Angelina. So
ome angry with her, and we mistreat her. That is why
  a has left us, because she suffered so much from our
  r.
     Kee ping Angelina in Our Life
inute Angelina stepped down from the painting and
  a real person, she smiled a heavenly smile at David.
  ked at the bowl of the noodles and she said, “How
   eat such junk food? Just a minute.” Then she disap-
 And in no time at all, she reappeared with a basket of
egetables. She prepared a very delicious bowl of noo-
   David quite different from the instant ones he was
  eating.
gelina is talented. She knows how to make you happy.
u were not grateful, and you lacked understanding.
                        153


was so difficult to be with, you have left your David.
 gh you did your best to help him, it was impossible to
 h him. He was not capable of recognizing that you are
gelina. His habit energy pushed him to continue to live
 nsume in a way that poisoned his body and mind.
 he went to the bar every night and got drunk. And no
 how much you pleaded with him, he could not stop
 g. And every night he came home drunk and beat
 e was not able to listen to you at all. No matter how
ou tried to be sweet, to be patient, he always cut you
d didn’t allow you to finish your sentence. He was
 apable of listening to you. You were patient, but you
 ur limits. Communication was impossible and so you
 .
    W h e r e I s Yo u r A n g e l i n a N o w ?
s David, and who is Angelina? I would like you to an-
 is question. Are you David? If you are David, then
 s your Angelina now? Is she still with you, or has she
  ? What have you done to her? How did you treat her?
                       154


 ngelina now? Where is she? What have I done to her?”
are very important questions that help us to look
 s is a meditation, true meditation. David might be
 rtner. Angelina might be your partner. Angelina can
an or a woman, David as well. Angelina stepped into
e. In the beginning you were so happy to be with her,
 rished her presence. You thought that with her, life
ssible again. But you were not able to maintain that
  awareness. You lost the awareness that Angelina was
ft to you. You made her suffer so much that she left
 ere was a time when she pleaded with you to practice
e Mindfulness Trainings, but because of your strong
nergy, you never accepted. She begged you to consume
eration, and to stop smoking and drinking. She invited
 use loving speech, to listen deeply, to associate with
eople and not with those who water negative seeds in
 t you never listened to her. You continued with your
 life, pushed by your habit energy, and that is why she
leave.
 r Angelina may be your daughter or your son. He or
 come into your life. How have you treated him or her?
                      155


 ngelina? Maybe your Angelina has left home. In the
David was about to commit suicide after the departure
 elina. But he remembered the talk he heard about the
e of communicating through incense, and suddenly
pair turned into hope. He believed that if he offered
  ense of mindfulness and concentration, Angelina
come back to him. He had an opportunity to sit down,
k, and to look back into his life.
               Beginning Anew
daily life we run continuously. We do not have the ca-
or the opportunity to stop and look deeply into our
e must look back, and look deeply in order to under-
David sat for forty-five minutes in his room, looking
 his life. He gained a lot of insight and he began to cry.
 d for the first time in his life because he recognized his
 nergy and the damage he had caused to the people
  him, his parents, his friends, his brothers and sisters,
mself.
  may practice sitting meditation everyday, but have we
                         156


 see how things have deteriorated between you and her:
u treated her, how you made her suffer, and how she
  . When you can look into your relationship in this
u are practicing deep meditation. The insight you get
  you exactly what to do and what not to do. It is pos-
r you to offer the incense of the heart and call your
  a back. Angelina is always there. Love is still in her
 he is ready to forgive, if you know how to burn the
 of your heart, the incense of the Mindfulness Train-
 ncentration, and insight.
  may be a lucky person, because more than one An-
has stepped into your life. Your partner, your son,
  ughter, your father, your mother are also your An-
 The practice is to call your Angelina by his or her
me, to recognize and appreciate that he or she is your
  a. Do not say that no Angelina has ever come into
e. That’s not true. Sit mindfully and silently call her
  is name. “My Angelina, I’m sorry. You have stepped
   life, and I have made you suffer. I have made myself
 t the same time. I did not mean to. I was unskillful.
ot know how to protect myself, and protect you, with
ctice of the Mindfulness Trainings. I want to begin
                       157


   you.
        Protecting My Angelinas
 David also. I have many Angelinas in my life. And in
all meditation hall, I have a picture of about one hun-
  my Angelinas—they are my students who live in our
e centers in France and the United States. Before I
e sitting meditation, I always look at that picture and
  all my Angelinas. Then I sit down and I vow to live
  a way that my Angelinas will never leave me. I vow to
e mindful speech, to practice the Mindfulness Train-
nd not to betray my Angelinas. By doing so, I avoid
   suffering to my Angelinas and I am able bring them
 is makes me very happy.
your Angelina has left you, what will you do to bring
 k into your life? Your Angelina still may be with you,
  ut to leave you, or your Angelina may have already left
  both cases the practice of protection is relevant, be-
he practice can help you to keep her or to bring her
   you. Please do not get lost in abstract notions. Spir-
                        158


 g real suffering. This is the kind of dharma that is ap-
te and effective and relevant to the situation. Use all
me and energy to look back and ask yourself these
ns: Where is my Angelina now? How have I treated
 d if she has left: What should I do in order to bring
me again?
                        159




   MBRACING ANGER
WITH MINDFULNESS
           The Knots of Anger
 onsciousness there are blocks of pain, anger, and frus-
 called internal formations. They are also called knots
  they tie us up and obstruct our freedom.
 en someone insults us, or does something unkind to
nternal formation is created in our consciousness. If
n’t know how to undo the internal knot and transform
 not will stay there for a long time. And the next time
 e says something or does something to you of the
ature, that internal formation will grow stronger. As
 r blocks of pain in us, our internal formations have
  er to push us, to dictate our behavior.
                       161


 crystallized formation. The Sanskrit word for internal
ion is samyojana. It means “to crystallize.” Every one of
internal formations that we need to take care of. With
 ctice of meditation we can undo these knots and ex-
 e transformation and healing.
 t all internal formations are unpleasant. There are also
 t internal formations, but they can still make us suf-
hen you taste, hear, or see something pleasant, then
easure can become a strong internal knot. When the
of your pleasure disappears, you miss it and you begin
ng for it. You spend a lot of time and energy trying to
 nce it again. If you smoke marijuana or drink alcohol,
gin to like it, then it becomes an internal formation in
  dy and in your mind. You cannot get it off your mind.
 ll always look for more. The strength of the internal
 pushing you and controlling you. So internal forma-
 eprive us of our freedom.
ling in love is a big internal formation. Once you are
  you think only of the other person. You are not free
re. You cannot do anything; you cannot study, you can-
 rk, you cannot enjoy the sunshine or the beauty of
around you. You can think only of the object of your
                         162


ou have gotten into an accident. So love can also be an
l knot.
asant or unpleasant, both kinds of knots take away
erty. That is why we should guard our body and our
ery carefully, to prevent these knots from taking root
  rugs, alcohol, and tobacco can create internal forma-
  our body. And anger, craving, jealousy, despair can
nternal formations in our mind.
         Tr a i n i n g i n A g g r e s s i o n
 s an internal formation, and since it makes us suffer,
our best to get rid of it. Psychologists like the expres-
 etting it out of your system.” And they speak about
 anger, like ventilating a room filled with smoke. Some
 ogists say that when the energy of anger arises in you,
 uld ventilate it by hitting a pillow, kicking something,
oing into the forest to yell and shout.
 a kid you were not supposed to say certain swear
Your parents may not have allowed you to say these
because they are harmful, they damage relationships.
                         163


 e feeling of oppression. This is also venting.
 ple who use venting techniques like hitting a pillow or
ng are actually rehearsing anger. When someone is
 nd vents their anger by hitting a pillow, they are learn-
 angerous habit. They are training in aggression. In-
we generate the energy of mindfulness and embrace
very time it manifests.
  Tr e a t i n g A n g e r w i t h Te n d e r n e s s
ulness does not fight anger or despair. Mindfulness is
  order to recognize. To be mindful of something is to
ize that something is there in the present moment.
ulness is the capacity of being aware of what is going
he present moment. “Breathing in I know that anger
 nifested in me; breathing out I smile towards my
This is not an act of suppression or of fighting. It is
of recognizing. Once we recognize our anger, we em-
t with a lot of awareness, a lot of tenderness.
hen it is cold in your room, you turn on the heater, and
 ter begins to send out waves of hot air. The cold air
 have to leave the room for the room to become warm.
                         164


 practice taking care of our anger in the same way.
 lness recognizes anger, is aware of its presence, accepts
ows it to be there. Mindfulness is like a big brother
 es not suppress his younger brother’s suffering. He
says, “Dear brother, I’m here for you.” You take your
r brother in your arms and you comfort him. This is
our practice.
 gine a mother getting angry with her baby and hitting
 en he cries. That mother does not know that she and
 y are one. We are mothers of our anger, and we have
 our baby, our anger, not fight and destroy it. Our
  us, and our compassion is also us. To meditate does
an to fight. In Buddhism, the practice of meditation
be the practice of embracing and transforming, not of
 .
   U s i n g A n g e r, U s i n g S u f f e r i n g
w the tree of enlightenment, we must make good use
afflictions, our suffering. It is like growing lotus flow-
 cannot grow a lotus on marble. We cannot grow a
ithout mud.
                       165


 nto a battlefield, good fighting evil. We treat our af-
 s, our anger, our jealousy with a lot of tenderness.
 anger comes up in us, we should begin to practice
 l breathing right away: “Breathing in, I know that
s in me. Breathing out, I am taking good care of my
We behave exactly like a mother: “Breathing in, I know
y child is crying. Breathing out, I will take good care of
ld.” This is the practice of compassion.
 ou don’t know how to treat yourself with compassion,
 n you treat another person with compassion? When
arises, continue to practice mindful breathing and
 l walking to generate the energy of mindfulness. Con-
o tenderly embrace the energy of anger within you.
may continue to be there for some time, but you are
 cause the Buddha is in you, helping you to take good
 your anger. The energy of mindfulness is the energy
 Buddha. When you practice mindful breathing and
 ing your anger, you are under the protection of the
a. There is no doubt about it: the Buddha is embrac-
  and your anger with a lot of compassion.
                        166


            Mindfulness Energy
 you are angry, when you feel despair, you practice
 l breathing and mindful walking, to generate the en-
 mindfulness. This energy allows you to recognize and
e your painful feelings. And if your mindfulness is
ong enough, you ask a brother or a sister in the prac-
sit close to you, to breathe with you, to walk with you
r to support you with his or her mindfulness energy.
cticing mindfulness does not mean that you have to do
ing on your own. You can practice with the support of
iends. They can generate enough mindfulness energy
 you take care of your strong emotions.
 can also support others with our mindfulness when
   in difficulty. When our child is drowning in a strong
n, we can hold his or her hand and say, “My dear one,
 . Breathe in and out with Mommy, with Daddy.” We
o invite our child to do walking meditation with us,
 aking her hand and helping her calm down, with each
 hen you give your child some of your mindfulness en-
 e will be able to calm down very quickly and embrace
otions.
                       167


          the Suffering of Anger
rst function of mindfulness is to recognize, not to
 Breathing in, I know that anger has manifested in me.
my little anger.” And breathing out, “I will take good
 you.”
 ce we have recognized our anger, we embrace it. This
econd function of mindfulness, and it is a very pleas-
 ctice. Instead of fighting, we are taking good care of
otion. If you know how to embrace your anger, some-
  ill change.
  have said many times that it is like cooking potatoes.
ver the pot and then the water will begin to boil. You
 eep the stove on for at least twenty minutes for the
es to cook. Your anger is a kind of potato and you
 eat a raw potato.
ndfulness is like the fire cooking the potatoes of anger.
rst few minutes of recognizing and embracing your
  ith tenderness can bring results. You get some relief.
is still there, but you do not suffer so much anymore,
e you know how to take care of your baby. So the third
 n of mindfulness is soothing, relieving. Anger is there,
                        168


 care of the baby and the situation is under control.
      Keeping Mindfulness Alive
ho is this mother? The mother is the living Buddha.
pacity of being mindful, the capacity of being under-
g, loving, and caring is the Buddha in us. Every time
capable of generating mindfulness, it makes the Bud-
us a reality. With the Buddha in you, you have noth-
worry about anymore. Everything will be fine if you
 ow to keep the Buddha within you alive.
  important to recognize that we always have the Bud-
 us. Even if we are angry, unkind, or in despair, the
  is always within us. This means we always have the
al to be mindful, to be understanding, to be loving.
 need to practice mindful breathing or walking in
o touch the Buddha within us. When you touch the
 mindfulness that lies in your consciousness, the Bud-
 l manifest in your mind consciousness and embrace
 ger. You don’t have to worry, just continue to practice
ng or walking to keep the Buddha alive. Then every-
                       169


e nature of anger. The Buddha understands. And this
tanding will bring about transformation.
e energy of mindfulness contains the energy of con-
ion as well as the energy of insight. Concentration
ou to focus on just one thing. With concentration, the
 of looking becomes more powerful. Because of that,
make a breakthrough that is insight. Insight always has
wer of liberating you. If mindfulness is there, and you
how to keep mindfulness alive, concentration will be
oo. And if you know how to keep concentration alive,
 will also come. So mindfulness recognizes, embraces,
 ieves. Mindfulness helps us look deeply in order to
sight. Insight is the liberating factor. It is what frees us
ows transformation to happen. This is the Buddhist
e of taking care of anger.
  h e B a s e m e n t a n d t h e L i v i n g Ro o m
 use a house to represent our consciousness. We can
y two parts: the basement is the store consciousness
e living area is mind consciousness. Internal forma-
like anger, rest in the store consciousness—in the
                         170


 up and manifests on the level of your mind con-
 ess, your living room. It manifests as a zone of energy
akes the atmosphere in your living room heavy and
 ant. When the energy of anger comes up, we suffer.
 enever anger manifests, the practitioner immediately
the energy of mindfulness to manifest also, through
ctice of mindful walking and mindful breathing. This
other zone of energy—the energy of mindfulness—
ed. It is so important to learn how to practice walk-
  breathing mindfully, how to practice cleaning and
g mindfully, how to practice mindfulness in our daily
 en, every time a negative energy manifests, we will
 ow to generate the energy of mindfulness in order to
e it and take care of it.
 M i n d N e e d s G o o d C i r c u l a t i o n , To o
 re toxins in our body and, if our blood does not cir-
well, these toxins will accumulate in certain places. In
o remain healthy, our organism has to expel these tox-
assaging will stimulate the blood circulation. When
od circulates well, it can nourish organs like the kid-
                       171


tion. Drinking a lot of water and practicing deep
 ng can also help expel toxins from the body, through
n, lungs, urine, and excrement. All practices that help
 te toxins from our system are very important.
 w suppose I have a very painful spot in my body, be-
  lot of toxins have accumulated there. Every time I
 his spot, it hurts; this is equivalent to touching an in-
  not in the mind. The energy of mindfulness, the prac-
 mindfulness, is like the practice of massaging an
 l formation. You may have a block of suffering, pain,
, or despair in you and this is a poison, a toxin in your
  usness. You have to practice mindfulness in order to
 e and transform the toxin.
 bracing your pain and sorrow with the energy of
  lness is exactly the practice of massaging, not our
 ut our consciousness. Our consciousness may be in a
  n of bad circulation. When the blood does not circu-
 l, then our organs cannot function properly and we get
 hen our psyche does not circulate well, then our mind
come sick. Mindfulness is an energy that stimulates
celerates circulation throughout blocks of pain.
                         172


  cks of pain, sorrow, anger, and despair always want to
p into our mind consciousness, into our living room,
  they have grown big and need our attention. They
  emerge, but we don’t want them to come up because
e painful to look at. So we try to block their way. We
 em to stay asleep down in the basement. Because we
want to face them, our habit is to fill our living room
 her guests. But whenever we have ten or fifteen min-
 free time, and we don’t know what to do, these inter-
 ts will come up and make a mess in the living room.
 d this, we pick up a book, we turn on the television,
or a drive, we do anything to keep our living room oc-
 When the living room is occupied, these unpleasant
l formations will not come up.
mental formations need to circulate, but we don’t want
   come up because we don’t want to feel the pain. We
 em to stay locked away. We are very afraid, because we
that if we allow them to come up, we will suffer a lot.
 why our daily habit is to fill up the living room with
like television, books, magazines, and conversations, in
  keep these internal formations from surfacing. When
                       173


ear. They may manifest in our body or in our mind.
metimes when we have a headache, we take aspirin, but
 dache does not go away. This kind of headache can be
tom of mental illness. Sometimes we have allergies. We
hat it is a physical problem, but allergies can also be a
 m of mental illness. We are advised by doctors to take
 and so we continue to suppress our internal forma-
making our sickness worse.
   M a k i n g Yo u r U n w a n t e d G u e s t s
                Fe e l a t H o m e
you remove the embargo and the blocks of pain come
  will have to suffer a bit. There is no way to avoid it.
 at is why the Buddha said that you have to learn how
 race this pain. It is for this reason that the practice of
 lness is so important. You generate a strong source
rgy so that you can recognize, embrace, and take care
 e negative energies. And since the Buddha is in you as
rgy of mindfulness, you invite Buddha to come up and
  u embrace the internal knots. If they don’t want to
 p, you coax them to come up. After being embraced
                         174


 instance, the Buddha said that all of us have the seed
  but most of us suppress it and keep it locked in the
o help us identify, embrace, and look deeply at the
f fear, he offered us the practice of the Five Remem-
 :
am of the nature to grow old. I cannot escape old age.
am of the nature to have ill health. I cannot escape ill health.
am of the nature to die. I cannot escape dying.
ll that is dear to me and everyone I love are of the nature to
ange. There is no way to escape being separated from them. I
nnot keep anything. I come here empty-handed, and I go
  pty-handed.
 y actions are my only true belongings. I cannot escape the
nsequences of my actions. My actions are the ground on which
stand.
 ry day we have to practice like this, taking a few mo-
 o contemplate each exercise as we follow our breath-
  practice the Five Remembrances so that the seed of
   circulate. We must invite it up to be recognized, to
raced. And then when it goes back down again, it be-
smaller.
                           175


You don’t have peace when fear is there, so it becomes
  on which anger can grow. Fear is based on ignorance,
is lack of understanding is also a primary cause of
 ry time you give your internal formations a bath of
 lness, the blocks of pain in you become lighter and
ngerous. So give your anger, your despair, your fear a
f mindfulness every day—that is your practice. If
 lness is not there, it is very unpleasant to have these
ome up. But if you know how to generate the energy
 dfulness, it is very healing to invite them up every day
 brace them. And after several days or weeks of bring-
m up daily and helping them go back down again, you
good circulation in your psyche, and the symptoms of
 illness will begin to disappear.
ndfulness does the work of massaging your internal
ions, your blocks of suffering. You have to allow them
ulate, and this is possible only if you are not afraid of
f you learn not to fear your knots of suffering, you can
 ow to embrace them with the energy of mindfulness
 transform them.
                        176


 I N D F U L B R E AT H I N G
r e a t h e t o Ta k e C a r e o f Yo u r A n g e r
the energy of anger, jealousy, or despair manifests in
should know how to handle it, otherwise we will be
elmed by it and suffer tremendously. Mindful breath-
he practice that can help us take care of our emotions.
 t, in order to take good care of our emotions, we have
n how to take good care of our body. By becoming
 f breathing in and out we become aware of our body.
 ing in, I am aware of my whole body, breathing out,
  are of my whole body.” Go back to your body. Em-
t with the energy of mindfulness generated by the
e of mindful breathing.
                       177


  ay be suffering or sick. So we should know how to go
  our body, in order to embrace it tenderly, with mind-
. As a mother holds her baby tenderly in her arms, we
ng very much the same thing. We go back to our body
 embrace our body with tenderness, with the energy of
 lness. After having embraced our body as a whole, we
 o embrace all the different parts of our body one by
our eyes, our nose, our lungs, our heart, our stomach,
 neys, and so on.
   Dee p Relaxation for Embracing
            and Healing Anger
 st position for practicing this is lying down. You focus
tention on a part of your body, such as your heart. As
eathe in, you become aware of your heart, and as you
  out, you smile towards it. You send it your love, your
ness.
e energy of mindfulness is like a beam of light that can
 s very clearly every part of our body. Modern hospi-
ve scanners that can scan our body to see each area
                        178


 call this practice of scanning our body with a beam
dfulness, Deep Relaxation (see text for Deep Relax-
n Appendix D). Another instruction for mindful
ng is “Breathing in, I calm my whole body, breathing
alm my whole body.” Your body may be agitated and
 nd embracing with the energy of mindfulness can
 to relax and become peaceful again. When the body
ns peacefully, it can begin to heal. This helps the mind
  and also heal.
 ording to this teaching, our breath is a part of our
   hen we are afraid of something or when we are angry,
ath is shallow and the quality of our breathing is very
  r breath is short, noisy, and not peaceful at all. But if
ow how to begin breathing in and breathing out mind-
 lming your breath, then, in just a few minutes, your
will improve. Your breathing will become lighter, more
 nd more harmonious. And your mind will begin to
athing, like meditation, is no less than an art. You have
ery artful handling your in-breath and out-breath, so
 rmony can be reestablished in your body and your
f you dominate your breath with violence, you cannot
                        179


 you can continue breathing like this in order to em-
 ifferent parts of your body.
hile lying down, practice mindful breathing and gen-
he energy of mindfulness. Scan your body with the
beam of mindfulness from the top of your head until
 ive at the soles of your feet. It may take half an hour.
 the best way of showing your concern, your love, your
on to your body.
 h of us should be able to do this at least once a day.
n arrange your schedule so that every day, maybe be-
ing to sleep, the whole family can lie down comfort-
  the floor and practice total relaxation for twenty or
minutes. Turn off the television and invite everyone to
nd participate. In the beginning you might like to use
 to guide the whole family in practicing total relax-
Later, one of you can lead the practice, helping every-
m and care for their bodies.
  u C a n M a k e I t T h r o u g h t h e S t o r m
 are several simple methods for taking care of our
 emotions. One is “belly breathing,” breathing from
                       180


 omen. To stay on the level of the intellect is danger-
rong emotions are like a storm, and to stand in the
 of a storm is very dangerous. Yet that is what most of
  hen we stay in our minds, letting our feelings over-
us. Instead, we have to get rooted by bringing our at-
 downward. We focus on our abdomen and practice
l breathing, just giving all of our attention to its rise
 . We can do this either sitting or lying down.
  en you look at a tree in a storm, you see that the top
 tree is very unstable and vulnerable. The wind can
he smaller branches at any time. But when you look
o the trunk of the tree, you have a different impres-
ou see that the tree is very solid and still, and you
hat it will be able to withstand the storm. We are also
 ee. Our head is like the top of the tree during a tem-
 a strong emotion, so we have to bring our attention
o the level of our navel. We begin to practice mindful
ng. We concentrate just on our breathing and on the
   fall of our abdomen. It is a very important practice
  it helps us to see that, although an emotion may be
ong, it will stay only for a while and then go; it can-
 forever. If you train yourself to practice like this dur-
 icult times, you will survive these storms.
                       181


 someone die because of an emotion? You are more
 ur emotions. It is important to remember this. Dur-
 isis, when you breathe in and out, maintain the aware-
 at your emotion will go away if you continue to
e. After you have succeeded a few times, you will have
ence in yourself and in the practice. Let us not get
 by our thoughts and feelings. Let us bring our atten-
 wn to our belly and breathe in and out. This storm
 away, so don’t be afraid.
       Recognizing and Embracing
            M e n t a l Fo r m a t i o n s
 brace our bodies with mindfulness in order to calm
We can do the same with mental formations: “Breath-
I am aware of my mental formations. Breathing out, I
 re of my mental formations.” In Buddhist psychology
 e fifty-one mental formations. There are negative men-
mations, like anger, craving, and jealousy, and there are
e mental formations, like mindfulness and equanimity.
hen we experience a positive mental formation like joy
 passion, we should breathe in and out in order to be
                        182


 multiplied ten or twenty times. Mindful breathing
s sustain them for a longer time and experience them
eeply. Therefore it is very important to embrace our
  mental formations, like joy, happiness, and compas-
hen they arise, because they are a kind of food that
s to grow. We speak of “the joy of meditation as daily
because the feeling of joy arising from meditation,
 indfulness, nourishes and sustains us.
 ilarly, when the mental formation that arises is nega-
e anger or jealousy, we should go back to ourselves,
brace it tenderly, calming it with our mindful breath-
 e a mother would soothe her feverish child. So,
 ing in, I calm my mental formations. Breathing out, I
y mental formations.”
 e d s o f A n g e r, S e e d s o f C o m p a s s i o n
en talk about consciousness as soil. The seeds of all
 formations are buried in our store consciousness.
mental formations are born, arise in our mind con-
ess, remain for some time, and then return to the store
 usness in the form of a seed.
                       183


ring up and manifest itself in our mind consciousness,
per level of consciousness. If a positive seed, like the
  joy or compassion, is watered and manifests, it will
 s feel happy. But if a negative seed, like the seed of
y, is watered and manifests, it will make us feel un-
 As long as our joy or anger is buried in the soil and no
uches it, we call it a seed. But when it manifests in
 onsciousness, we call it a mental formation. We have
 gnize anger in both its forms: as a seed in our store
 usness and as a mental formation, an active zone of
 that comes up in our mind consciousness. We have to
that even when anger does not manifest, it is still there.
 ryone has a seed of anger in the depth of his or her
 usness. When that seed does not manifest, you don’t
gry at all. You don’t feel angry with anyone. You feel
ou feel fresh, you look lovely. You smile, laugh, and
ut this does not mean that anger is not in you. Anger
 t be manifesting in your mind consciousness, but it is
 there in your store consciousness. If someone does
 ing or says something that touches the seed of anger
 it will manifest very quickly in the living room.
 ood practitioner is not someone who no longer has
ger or suffering. This is not possible. A good practi-
                       184


 ctice does not know how to handle the energy of
 hen it manifests, and he or she can easily be over-
 d by anger.
 if you practice mindful living, you do not allow anger
whelm you like that. You invite the seed of mindful-
  to take care of your anger. Mindful breathing and
  will help you to do this.
abit Energy and Mindful Breathing
have habit energy in us. We are intelligent enough to
hat if we do something or say something based on our
nergy, we will damage our relationships. And yet, even
is intelligence, we still do things out of anger, we still
 gs out of anger. Therefore, many of us have caused a
uffering in our relationships with other people. After
mage has been done, you are full of regret and you
at you will never do such a thing again. You are very
 you have a great deal of good will. But the next time
 ation presents itself, you do exactly the same thing,
 exactly the same thing, and you cause the same dam-
in and again.
                        185


 ing, and transforming can help. That is why the Bud-
 vised us to practice mindful breathing to recognize
  e care of our habit energy as soon as it manifests. If
  capable of embracing your habit energy with the en-
  mindfulness, then you are safe, you are not going to
he same mistake again.
ere was a young American friend who came to Plum
  and enjoyed the practice very much during his three
with us. He was very stable, compassionate, and un-
 ding during his stay. One day, he was asked by the
 to go shopping for the community in preparation for
sgiving. While doing the shopping, he suddenly real-
 at he was rushing and wanted everything to be done
  ickly so that he could go back to Plum Village.
is was the first time during the whole three weeks that
 this kind of feeling: of rushing, of wanting every-
o be done quickly. In Plum Village, he was surrounded
thers practicing with solidity. He profited from their
  and so the habit energy of rushing, of becoming
d, never had a chance to manifest. Shopping in town,
 alone. He did not have the same kind of energy sup-
g him, so the seed of his habit energy arose right away.
 y quickly, he was able to recognize this habit energy
                       186


uickly, quickly, quickly. With this insight, he returned
 ractice of mindful breathing and said, “Hello Mom,
 you are there.” After he had done this, the energy of
  just vanished. He recognized his habit energy, em-
it mindfully, and was able to transform it. He regained
ce and solidity that he experienced before he left the
 nity. He knew he was only able to do this because of
ctice at Plum Village.
 of us are capable of doing this. Whenever our habit
comes up, all we need to do is recognize it and call it
 ame. We breathe mindfully and say, “Hello, my jeal-
ello, my fear; hello, my irritation and anger. I know you
 e, and I am here for you. I will take good care of you
 brace you with mindfulness.” Breathing in, we greet
bit energy, and breathing out we smile towards it.
we do this, our habit energy can no longer dominate
are safe. We have liberated ourselves.
                       187




    R E STO R I N G T H E
            PURE LAND
   Making Happiness a Priority
 me to time we have to make a decision, and sometimes
ision is very difficult. We are forced to make a painful
 But if we know what is most important to us, what
t deeply want for our life, the decision-making will be-
asier, and we won’t have to suffer a lot.
 en a person wants to become a monastic, for instance,
t an easy decision. If your desire to be a monastic is
 n one hundred percent, don’t become a monastic. It
e more than one hundred percent. When you feel that
ic life is what you want more than anything else, other
                        189


ave written three volumes on the history of Buddhism
nam. All three volumes have been well received by read-
 ere is one more to write, the fourth volume. It’s very
 ant: the history of Buddhism in Vietnam from 1964
present. Writing this book is a very exciting and inter-
project. I have lived through this period and so have
firsthand experience. If I don’t write it, there might not
  ne else with the time or the direct experience to do it.
  is would do some injustice to history. Writing this
  ould also help people to learn more about the devel-
t and practice of Buddhism.
me there is a historian. And I feel great joy when I
 is role: making discoveries, revealing things that are
 other people, and giving the younger generation a di-
  to go in. They can learn a lot from the mistakes and
 cesses of past generations. So the desire to write this
 volume is very strong. But I have not been able to
t because there are many more urgent things to do,
 helping relieve the suffering of people right beside me,
  t of me, and around me. I cannot afford to be a
 , a historian, although I know that this book is very
 ant. I have all the documents needed for writing the
  ut I would need one year to complete it. Which would
                        190


 all have many things to do in our daily life. You have
de which things are the most important to you. Get-
 niversity degree may take you six or even eight years,
 t is quite a long period of time. You may believe that
gree is important for your happiness. It might be, but
s there are other elements that are more important to
 ll-being, and to your happiness. You can work on im-
  the relationship between you and your father, your
, or your partner. Do you have time for this? Can you
enough time in order to do this work? It is very im-
  to improve the relationship between you and your
  ones. You are willing to put aside six years for a
a; do you have the wisdom to use just as much time to
ut a relationship? To deal with your anger? This time
 ng you and the other person the happiness and sta-
ou need to restore communication.
      Wr i t i n g a B o o k o n Yo u r s e l f
 y, a university professor from the United States came
m Village. He was very eager to write a book on
 s Merton and myself. He wanted to talk to me about
                       191


to the practice of making yourself and the people
  you happy? That is more important than writing a
 n Thomas Merton and myself. Many books have been
  on Thomas Merton already.” Our friend said, with the
tentions and a lot of love, “But no one has written a
 n you yet.” I answered, “I don’t care about a book on
t I care very much about you writing a book on your-
rite with your whole heart to transform yourself into
rument of dharma, of the practice, so that you can be-
  free person, a happy person. That way you can help
  eople around you to be happy also.”
hat is most important to me is to establish a good re-
hip between my students and myself. I have to make it
 e for people to practice and to transform. This is very
ing and nourishing. Every time a practitioner is capa-
 ransforming her suffering, and able to establish a good
nship with others, it is quite a victory. Not only a vic-
r him or for her, but a victory for the whole commu-
  d for the practice as well. This is very nourishing for
  s. We know the story of the young nun in Plum Vil-
  o was able to help a mother and daughter reconcile.
  as a real victory. It strengthened her faith in the prac-
d ours at the same time.
                          192


 o anything to help her, then you are not putting the
gs into practice. If it seems impossible for you to have
 ue with her, that’s because you lack experience in the
e. It is possible for you to talk to that person. Many
ask the question—“What if the other person doesn’t
  cooperate, doesn’t want to listen?” If the other per-
esn’t want to listen to you, to talk to you, or to work
 ith you right now, then continue to practice and trans-
ourself so that reconciliation will be possible.
iting a book on yourself is a way of looking deeply to
 ze the roots of your suffering and find ways to trans-
 em. It will help you become a free and happy person,
 make others around you happy also.
          Nectar of Compassion
ould nourish yourself with the nectar of compassion
you approach another person in order to reconcile.
 ssion is born from understanding—understanding
  other person also suffers. We tend to forget this. We
  our own suffering, and then we exaggerate, thinking,
 e else suffers like I do; I am the only one who suffers
                        193


uch.
may be that because the other person has not had
  support, he has not been able to advance on the path
 tice, and you have not helped him either. You are not
 le to help yourself. But the teachings are exactly for
 e community is exactly for that—for nourishing our-
with the nectar of compassion. We have to call on the
a, we have to call on the sangha to help us. The dharma
tive in the here and the now.
    Leaving the Prison of Notions
ould not practice like a machine, but with intelligence,
 each step, each breath, will make you feel better. Each
  l meal, each cup of tea, can make you feel better.
 the wonders of life within and around you. Nourish
 f by allowing the beautiful and healing elements
  you to penetrate you. This is the most important
o do.
as are not nourishing. In fact, ideas and notions very
 ecome obstacles. They can become a prison. We must
 ese ideas and notions behind in order to touch life, so
                        194


 They don’t have problems with other members of
 mmunity because they can accept everyone. They are
 . We have to cultivate the capacity of being happy
m. Living in the same environment, we share the same
ons of happiness. Others are capable of being happy,
n’t we? What kind of obstacle is preventing us from
 appy?
            A Crucial Letter
have been trained in loving speech and deep listening,
  resolve a conflict with someone else by speaking to
her directly. But if you are unsure whether your peace,
, and compassion are enough to keep you fresh, lov-
d calm while you speak, then you may like to practice
 a letter. Writing a letter is a very important practice.
  even if you have the best of intentions, if your prac-
 ot solid enough, you may become irritated when you
 nd react in an unskillful way. This can ruin your
 So sometimes it’s safer and easier to write a letter.
  letter you can be perfectly honest. You can tell the
erson that there are things that she has done that have
                       195


  language of peace, of loving-kindness. Try to estab-
logue. You can write things like “My dear friend, I may
 victim of wrong perceptions, and what I write here
  t reflect the truth. However, this is my experience of
 ation. This is what I really feel in my heart. If there is
  g wrong in what I write, let us sit down and look into
 her so that we can clarify the misunderstanding.”
our tradition, when the monks and the nuns come to-
 to offer guidance to someone who has requested it,
ways use this kind of language. They use the insight of
mmunity. This does not mean that the community’s vi-
 perfect, but it is the best insight they can offer us. So
  thers and sisters acknowledge in their response that
 offer this guidance, we are aware there may be things
  have not understood. There may be positive things in
 t we have not seen. And there may be some wrong per-
   on the part of the community.” So when you write a
o the other person, do the same: “If my perceptions are
ht, then please correct me.” Use loving speech when
ite. If one sentence is not written well enough, you can
 begin anew and write another sentence that is more
 he letter, we have to demonstrate that we have the ca-
                        196


responsible for your suffering.” Because you have prac-
 oking deeply, you have discovered a number of dif-
oots and causes of the other person’s suffering. You
 him all these things. You can tell him of your own suf-
and show that you understand why he acted or spoke
  he did.
 e one, two, or even three weeks to finish your letter,
  it is a very important letter. It is more important
e fourth volume on the history of Buddhism in Viet-
  ore important than the book on Thich Nhat Hanh
omas Merton. That letter is crucial for your happiness.
me you spend writing it is even more important than
 or two years you spend writing your doctoral thesis.
 esis is not as crucial as this letter. Writing a letter like
he best thing you can do to have a breakthrough and
communication.
  are not alone in doing this. You have brothers and sis-
o can shine light on you and help you with your let-
e people you need are right there with you in your
 nity. When we write a book, we give the manuscript
 ds, to specialists in order to ask for advice. Your fel-
ctitioners are specialists, because they all practice deep
g, deep looking, and loving speech.
                        197


   whether the language is kind enough, calm enough,
 ether the insight is deep enough. After you show it to
other or sister, you can still show it to another brother
er until you feel that your letter will bring about a
rmation in the other person and heal him.
 w much of your time, energy, and love will you invest
 a letter? And who would refuse to help you in this im-
t endeavor? It is crucial that you restore communica-
 th this person whom you care so much about. It may
r father, your mother, your daughter, or your partner.
she may be sitting right next to you.
        Restoring the Pure Land
beginning of your relationship, the other person made
  itment to love and take care of you, but now, he’s very,
 stant. He doesn’t want to look at you anymore. He
 want to hold your hand and walk with you anymore,
u suffer. In the beginning of your relationship, you felt
re in paradise. He fell in love with you, and you were
  y. Now it seems like he does not love you anymore and
                        198


u cannot get out of your hell.
  ere does that hell come from? Is there someone push-
  into that hell and keeping you there? Perhaps hell is
 by your mind, by your notions, by your wrong per-
s. So it is only with your mind that you can destroy the
d free yourself.
e practice of mindfulness, of recognizing and em-
  anger is to open the door of your hell and transform
 ing yourself and the other person, returning together
and of peace. This is possible and you are the one who
g to do it. Your friends who practice will, of course,
t you with their insight, their energy of mindfulness
ing-kindness.
 ou succeed in restoring the relationship, making the
erson and yourself happy again, you make a great con-
 n. Everyone enjoys the victory, because everyone gains
  ith in the practice. With support you can transform
  ll and restore the Pure Land, restore peace in your
 e. You can start straightaway. You can begin to write
 ter today. You will find out that with just a pencil
 heet of paper, you can practice and transform your
 ship.
                        199


 you’re sitting, doing walking meditation, working,
g, or cooking a meal, don’t think about the letter. But
 ing you do will be related to the letter.
e time you spend at your desk writing is only the time
 ing your feelings on paper. But this is not exactly the
  t that you produce the letter. You produce the letter
 ou water the vegetables, when you practice walking
tion, when you cook for the community. All these
es help you become more solid, more peaceful. The
 lness and concentration you generate can help the seed
erstanding and compassion in you to grow. When your
omes from the mindfulness you have been generating
 long, then it will be a wonderful letter.
    Live Each Moment Beautifully
fifteen years ago, an American Buddhist scholar visited
 le I was in the United States. She said, “Dear teacher,
 ite such beautiful poems. You spend a lot of time
g lettuce and doing things like that. Why don’t you use
me to write more poetry?” She had read somewhere
                       200


 not waste my time working in the garden but should
o write poems.
plied, “My dear friend, if I did not grow lettuce, I
 ot write the poems I write.” This is the truth. If you
ve in concentration, in mindfulness, if you don’t live
 oment of your daily life deeply, then you cannot write.
n’t produce anything valuable to offer to others.
 oem is a flower you offer to people. A compassionate
smile, an act filled with loving-kindness is also a flower
ooms on the tree of mindfulness and concentration.
 ough you don’t think about the poem while cooking
or your family, the poem is being written. When I
short story, a novel, or a play, it may take one week or
weeks to finish. But the story or the novel is always
n the same way, although you are not thinking about
 er you will write to your beloved one, the letter is
 ritten, deep down in your consciousness.
  cannot just sit there and write the story or the novel.
 ve to do other things as well. You drink tea, cook
st, wash your clothes, water the vegetables. The time
oing these things is extremely important. You have to
m well. You have to put one hundred percent of your-
o the act of cooking, watering the vegetable garden, of
                        201


anything else that you want to produce.
 ightenment is not separate from washing dishes or
g lettuce. To learn how to live each moment of our
fe in deep mindfulness and concentration is the prac-
he conception and unfolding of a piece of art take
xactly in these moments of our daily life. The time
 ou begin to write down the music or the poems is
 e time of delivering the baby. The baby has to be in
eady in order for you to deliver it. But if the baby is not
 even if you sit for hours and hours at your desk, there’s
g to deliver, and you cannot produce anything. Your in-
our compassion, and your ability to write in a way that
 ve the other person’s heart are flowers that bloom on
ee of practice. We should make good use of every mo-
f our daily life in order to allow this insight and com-
  to bloom.
     T h e G i f t o f Tr a n s f o r m a t i o n
nant mother can be very happy every time she thinks
baby inside of her. The baby, although not born yet,
e the mother a lot of joy. Every moment of her daily
                        202


that without her love, the baby may not be healthy.
 ry careful all the time. She knows that if she makes a
 , if she smokes a lot, if she drinks a lot of alcohol, this
t be good for her baby. So she’s very mindful, and she
th the mind of love.
ctitioners have to act very much like a mother. We
hat we want to produce something, we want to offer
 ing to humanity, to the world. Each of us carries
ourselves a baby—the baby Buddha, and it is the baby
   in us that we can offer. We must live in mindfulness
r to take good care of our baby Buddha.
s the energy of the Buddha in us that allows us to
 real love letter and reconcile with another person. A
e letter is made of insight, understanding, and com-
 . Otherwise it is not a love letter. A true love letter can
e a transformation in the other person, and therefore
world. But before it produces a transformation in the
erson, it has to produce a transformation within you.
me you take to write the letter may be your whole life.
                         203




um Village, couples, family members, or friends often sign this treaty in a
ny in which the whole community is present. However, you can adapt it in
way that makes you feel comfortable. At the end are Buddhist references,
t please feel free to change them to match your own spiritual tradition.
        P E A C E T R E AT Y
er That We May Live Long and Happily Together, In
That We May Continually Develop and Deepen Our
nd Understanding, We, the Undersigned, Vow to
e and Practice the Following:
 e one who is angry, agree to:
 efrain from saying or doing anything that might
ause further damage or escalate the anger.
Not suppress my anger.
                                 205


Calmly, within twenty-four hours, tell the one who
  as made me angry about my anger and suffering,
 ither verbally or by delivering a Peace Note.
Ask for an appointment later in the week, like Fri-
  ay evening, either verbally or by note, to discuss
 his matter more thoroughly.
Not say: “I am not angry, it’s okay, I am not suf-
 ering. There is nothing to be angry about.”
Look deeply into my daily life, while sitting, walk-
 ng, lying down, working, and driving in order
 o see:
The ways that I myself, have been unskillful at
 imes.
How l have hurt the other person because of my
own habit energy.
How the strong seed of anger in me is the primary
 ause of my anger.
How the other person is only the secondary cause.
How the other person is only seeking relief from
his or her suffering.
That as long as the other person suffers, I cannot
be truly happy.
                       206


killfulness and lack of mindfulness.
 ostpone the Friday meeting if I do not feel calm
nough to meet with the other person.
 e one who has made the other angry, agree to:
  espect the other person’s feelings, not ridicule
 im/her and allow enough time for him/her to
alm down.
Not press for an immediate discussion.
  onfirm the other person’s request for a meeting,
ither verbally or by note, and assure him or her
hat I will be there.
f l can apologize, do so right away and not wait
 ntil Friday evening.
 ractice mindful breathing and deep looking to
ee how:
 have seeds of anger and unkindness as well as the
 abit energy, which make the other person unhappy.
 have mistakenly thought that making the other
 erson suffer would relieve my own suffering.
 y making him/her suffer, I make myself suffer.
                      207


ustify myself and without waiting for the Friday
meeting.
e Vow with the Presence of the Lord Buddha as Witness
     and the Mindful Presence of Our Sangha,
                    to Abide by
These Articles and Practice Them Wholeheartedly. We
   Invoke the Three Gems for Protection to Grant
             us Clarity and Confidence.
    Signed, ______________________
              ______________________
__ Day of ________ in the Year ____ at ________.
                        208


E FIVE MINDFULNESS
           TRAININGS
 T h e F i r s t M i n d f u l n e s s Tr a i n i n g :
            Reverence for Life
 f the suffering caused by the destruction of life, I vow
vate compassion and learn ways to protect the lives of
 animals, plants, and minerals. I am determined not to
 t to let others kill, and not to condone any act of
in the world, in my thinking, or in my way of life.
       The Second Mindfulness
          Tr a i n i n g : G e n e r o s i t y
 f the suffering caused by exploitation, social injustice,
 , and oppression, I vow to cultivate loving-kindness
                         209


  my time, energy, and material resources with those
e in real need. I am determined not to steal and not to
  anything that should belong to others. I will respect
 perty of others, but I will prevent others from profit-
m human suffering or the suffering of other species on
 T h e T h i r d M i n d f u l n e s s Tr a i n i n g :
          Sexual Responsibility
of the suffering caused by sexual misconduct, I vow to
 e responsibility and learn ways to protect the safety
 egrity of individuals, couples, families, and society. I
ermined not to engage in sexual relations without love
ong-term commitment. To preserve the happiness of
 and others, I am determined to respect my commit-
and the commitments of others. I will do everything
power to protect children from sexual abuse and to
  couples and families from being broken by sexual
 duct.
                       210


Deep Listening and Loving Speech
of the suffering caused by unmindful speech and the
y to listen to others, I vow to cultivate loving speech
ep listening in order to bring joy and happiness to
and relieve others of their suffering. Knowing that
can create happiness or suffering, I vow to learn to
ruthfully with words that inspire self-confidence, joy,
pe. I am determined not to spread news that I do not
o be certain and not to criticize or condemn things of
  am not sure. I will refrain from uttering words that
se division or discord, or that can cause the family or
  munity to break. I will make all efforts to reconcile
olve all conflicts, however small.
 T h e F i f t h M i n d f u l n e s s Tr a i n i n g :
         Mindful Consumption
of the suffering caused by unmindful consumption, I
 cultivate good health, both physical and mental, for
 my family, and my society by practicing mindful eat-
                       211


 ess, and in the collective body and consciousness of
 ily and society. I am determined not to use alcohol or
her intoxicant or to ingest food or other items that
n toxins, such as certain TV programs, magazines,
 films, and conversations. I am aware that to damage
  y or my consciousness with these poisons is to betray
estors, my parents, my society, and future generations.
  ork to transform violence, fear, anger, and confusion
elf and in society by practicing a diet for myself and
iety. I understand that a proper diet is crucial for self-
 rmation and for the transformation of society.
                       212


U I D E D M E D I TAT I O N S
      F O R LO O K I N G
         D E E P LY A N D
RELEASING ANGER
 y find these guided meditations helpful in practicing
chings you have received on transforming anger. You
de yourself through them silently or invite someone
guide the meditations, reading the exercises out loud.
 in with “Breathing in, I know I am breathing in.
ng out, I know I am breathing out.” Followed by the
rds “In, out.” You should always start with a few mo-
  f mindful breathing to calm your mind. Use the first
rd to accompany the in-breath, and the second key
o accompany the out-breath. Repeat these key words
 with your in- and out-breath in order to really touch
aning of the meditation. Avoid saying the words me-
                      213


rds alive during each in- and out-breath.
        Looking Dee ply at Anger
 ntemplating a person in
 er, I breathe in.               Angry person
 ing the suffering of that
 son, I breathe out.             Suffering
 ntemplating the damage
m anger to self and
 ers, I breathe in.              Anger harms self
 ing that anger burns and        and others
 troys happiness, I breathe
t.                               Destroys happiness
 ing anger’s roots in my
dy, I breathe in.                Anger’s roots in
 ing anger’s roots in my         body
nsciousness, I breathe out.      Anger’s roots in
                                 consciousness
                       214


orance, breathe in.       Anger’s roots in
iling to my wrong         wrong perceptions
ceptions and ignorance, I and ignorance
athe out.                 Smiling
ing the angry person
fer, I breathe in.        Angry person suffers
ling compassion for the
 ry person who suffers,
 eathe out.               Feeling compassion
ing the unfavorable
ironment and
 appiness of the angry
son, I breathe in.        Angry person
derstanding the causes of unhappy
  unhappiness, I breathe
.                         Understanding
                          unhappiness
ing myself burned by the
 of anger, I breathe in.  Burned by anger
                      215


reathe out.                  Compassion for
                             myself
 owing anger makes me
 k ugly, I breathe in.       Anger makes me
 ing myself as the chief     ugly
 se of my ugliness, I
 athe out.                   I cause my ugliness
 ing when I am angry I am
 urning house, I breathe in. I am a burning
king care of my anger and    house
 ng back to myself,
reathe out.                  Taking care of
                             myself
 ntemplating helping the
gry person, I breathe in.    Helping angry
 ing myself able to help     person
  angry person, I breathe
t.                           Capable of helping
                       216


             w i t h O u r Pa r e n t s
  g myself as a five-year-
 child, I breathe in.             Myself, five years old
iling to the five-year-old
 d, I breathe out.                Smiling
  g the five-year-old child
 ragile and vulnerable, I
athe in.                          Five-year-old, fragile
iling with love to the five-
r-old in me, I breathe out.       Smiling with love
  g my father as a five-
r-old boy, I breathe in.          Father, five years old
iling to my father as a
 -year-old boy, I breathe
 .                                Smiling
  g my five-year-old
her as fragile and
nerable, I breathe in.            Father, fragile and
iling with love and               vulnerable
                       217


 athe out.                  Smiling with love
                            and understanding
ng my mother as a five-
 r-old girl, I breathe in.  Mother, five years
 iling to my mother as a    old
 -year-old girl, I breathe
t.                          Smiling
ng my five-year-old
 ther as fragile and
 nerable, I breathe in.     Mother, fragile and
 iling with love and        vulnerable
derstanding to my mother
a five-year-old girl, I
 athe out.                  Smiling with love
                            and understanding
ng my father suffering as
hild, I breathe in.         Father, suffering as
 ing my mother suffering    a child
a child, I breathe out.     Mother, suffering as
                            a child
                        218


iling to my father in me,
 eathe out.                 Smiling
 g my mother in me, I
athe in.                    Mother in me
iling to my mother in me,
 eathe out.                 Smiling
derstanding the
 iculties that my father in
 has, I breathe in.         Difficulties of father
termined to work for the    in me
 ase of both my father
  me, I breathe out.        Releasing father
                            and me
derstanding the
 iculties that my mother
me has, I breathe in.       Difficulties of
termined to work for the    mother in me
 ase of both my mother
  me, I breathe out.        Releasing mother
                            and me
                      219




 D E E P R E L A X AT I O N
n example of how to guide yourself or others in Deep Relaxation.
  your body to rest is very important. When your body is at ease
xed, your mind will also be at peace. The practice of Deep Relax-
 ssential for your body and mind to heal. Please take the time to
 t often. Although the following guided relaxation may take you
 nutes, feel free to modify it to fit your situation. You can make it
  just five or ten minutes when you wake up in the morning, be-
g to bed in the evening, or during a short break in the middle of a
. You can also make it longer and more in-depth. The most im-
hing is to enjoy it.
  n comfortably on your back on the floor or on a bed.
                            221


 you breathe in and out, become aware of your whole
ying down. Feel all the areas of your body that are
  g the floor or the bed you are lying on; your heels, the
of your legs, your buttocks, your back, the back of
ands and arms, the back of your head. With each out-
 feel yourself sink deeper and deeper into the floor, let-
  of tension, letting go of worries, not holding on to
 g.
 you breathe in, feel your abdomen rising, and as your
  out, feel your abdomen falling. For several breaths,
tice the rise and fall of your abdomen.
 w, as you breathe in, become aware of your two feet.
 breathe out, allow your two feet to relax. Breathing in,
  ur love to your feet, and breathing out, smile to your
s you breathe in and out, know how wonderful it is to
  o feet, that allow you to walk, to run, to play sports,
ce, to drive, to do so many activities throughout the
 nd your gratitude to your two feet for always being
or you whenever you need them.
 athing in, become aware of your right and left legs.
 ng out, allow all the cells in your legs to relax. Breath-
smile to your legs, and breathing out, send them your
 ppreciate whatever degree of strength and health is
                        222


or. Release any tension you may be holding in your
athing in, become aware of your two hands lying on
or. Breathing out, completely relax all the muscles in
 o hands, releasing any tension you may be holding in
As you breathe in, appreciate how wonderful it is to
 o hands. As you breathe out, send a smile of love to
 o hands. Breathing in and out, be in touch with all the
your two hands allow you to do: to cook, to write, to
o hold the hand of someone else, to hold a baby, to
our own body, to draw, to play a musical instrument,
, to build and fix things, to pet an animal, to hold a
 tea. So many things are available to you because of
 o hands. Just enjoy the fact that you have two hands
ow all the cells in your hands to really rest.
athing in, become aware of your two arms. Breathing
ow your arms, to fully relax. As you breathe in, send
ve to your arms, and as you breathe out, smile to them.
 e time to appreciate your arms and whatever strength
 lth are there in your arms. Send them your gratitude
wing you to hug someone else, to swing on a swing, to
 d serve others, to work hard—cleaning the house,
g the lawn, to do so many things throughout the day.
                       223


aving your arms. As you embrace your arms with your
  lness, feel joy and ease in every part of your two arms.
 athing in, become aware of your shoulders. Breathing
ow any tension in your shoulders to flow out into the
  s you breathe in, send your love to your shoulders, and
breathe out, smile with gratitude to them. Breathing in
t, be aware that you may have allowed a lot of tension
ess to accumulate in your shoulders. With each exha-
allow the tension to leave your shoulders, feeling them
 ore and more deeply. Send them your tenderness and
nowing that you do not want to put too much strain
m, but that you want to live in a way that will allow
o be relaxed and at ease.
 athing in, become aware of your heart. Breathing out,
 our heart to rest. With your in-breath, send your love
  heart. With your out-breath, smile to your heart. As
  athe in and out, get in touch with how wonderful it is
  a heart still beating in your chest. Your heart allows
fe to be possible, and it is always there for you, every
 , every day. It never takes a break. Your heart has been
  since you were a four-week-old fetus in your mother’s
 It is a marvelous organ that allows you to do every-
 ou do throughout the day. Breathe in and know that
                         224


n, feel your heart relaxing more and more. Allow each
 our heart to smile with ease and joy.
athing in, become aware of your stomach and in-
. Breathing out, allow your stomach and intestines to
 s you breathe in, send them your love and gratitude.
 breathe out, smile tenderly to them. Breathing in and
ow how essential these organs are to your health. Give
  e chance to rest deeply. Each day they digest and as-
  the food you eat, giving you energy and strength.
eed you to take the time to recognize and appreciate
  s you breathe in, feel your stomach and intestines re-
 nd releasing all tension. As you breathe out, enjoy the
 t you have a stomach and intestines.
athing in, become aware of your eyes. Breathing out,
our eyes and the muscles around your eyes to relax.
ng in, smile to your eyes, and breathing out, send them
ve. Allow your eyes to rest and roll back into your
 s you breathe in and out, know how precious your two
. They allow you to look into the eyes of someone you
  see a beautiful sunset, to read and write, to move
 with ease, to see a bird flying in the sky, to watch a
—so many things are possible because of your two
 ke the time to appreciate the gift of sight and allow
                       225


u can continue to relax other areas of your body, using the same
 s above.
 w, if there is a place in your body that is sick or in
ake this time to become aware of it and send it your
reathing in, allow this area to rest, and breathing out,
o it with great tenderness and affection. Be aware that
re other parts of your body that are still strong and
. Allow these strong parts of your body to send their
h and energy to the weak or sick area. Feel the support,
 and love of the rest of your body penetrating the
 ea, soothing and healing it. Breathe in and affirm your
pacity to heal, breathe out and let go of the worry or
u may be holding in your body. Breathing in and out,
 ith love and confidence to the area of your body that
well.
 ally, breathing in, become aware of the whole of your
 ing down. Breathing out, enjoy the sensation of your
 body lying down, very relaxed and calm. Smile to
 hole body as you breathe in, and send your love and
ssion to your whole body as you breathe out. Feel all
                         226


and fall of your abdomen.
e guiding other people, and if you are comfortable doing so, you can
 a few relaxing songs or lullabies.
end, slowly stretch and open your eyes. Take your time
 p, calmly and lightly. Practice to carry the calm and
l energy you have generated into your next activity
oughout the day.
                           227




  ich Nhat Hanh has lived an extraordinary life in an extra-
dinary time. Since the age of sixteen he has been a Buddhist
  nk, a peace activist, and a seeker of the way. He has sur-
 ed persecution, three wars, and more than thirty years of
 le. He is the master of a temple in Vietnam whose lineage
es back over two thousand years and, indeed, is traceable to
 ddha himself. The author of more than one hundred
oks of poetry, fiction, and philosophy, Thich Nhat Hanh
s founded universities and social service organizations, and
 cued boat people; he led the Vietnamese Buddhist delega-
n at the Paris Peace Talks and was nominated for the Nobel
ace Prize by the Reverend Martin Luther King, Jr. He
 kes his home in France and Vermont.


ark), where monks, nuns, laymen, and laywomen practice the art
ful living. Visitors are invited to join the practice for at least one
 r information, please write to:
                        Plum Village
                       13 Martineau
                      33580 Dieulivol
                            France
         NH-office@plumvillage.org ( for women)
         LH-office@plumvillage.org ( for women)
          UH-office@plumvillage.org ( for men)
                    www.plumvillage.org
rmation about our monasteries, mindfulness practice centers, and
 n the United States please contact:
             Green Mountain Dharma Center
                        P.O. Box 182
            Hartland Four Corners, VT 05049
                   Tel: (802) 436–1103
                   Fax: (802) 436–1101
               MF-office@plumvillage.org
                    www.plumvillage.org
                   Deer Park Monastery
                     2499 Melru Lane
                  Escondido, CA 92026
                   Tel: (760) 291–1003
                   Fax: (760) 291–1172
                Deerpark@plumvillage.org

